              applied
              sciences
Article
Detachable Soft Actuators with Tunable Stiffness Based on
Wire Jamming
Long Bai, Hao Yan *, Jiafeng Li                   , Jiefeng Shan and Penghao Hou


                                            School of Mechanical, Electronic and Control Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China;
                                            16116352@bjtu.edu.cn (L.B.); 18116014@bjtu.edu.cn (J.L.); 21121271@bjtu.edu.cn (J.S.); 20126009@bjtu.edu.cn (P.H.)
                                            * Correspondence: hyan@bjtu.edu.cn


                                            Abstract: The integration of variable stiffness materials and structures into soft robots is a popular
                                            trend, allowing soft robots to switch between soft and rigid states in different situations. This
                                            concept combines the advantages of rigid mechanisms and soft robots, resulting in not only excellent
                                            flexibility but also tunable stiffness for high load capacity and fast and precise operation. Here,
                                            a stiffness-tunable soft actuator based on wire/fiber jamming structure is proposed, where the fiber-
                                            reinforced soft actuator is responsible for the bending motion, and the jamming structure acts as
                                            a stiffness-tunable layer controlled by vacuum pressure. The primary design objective of this study is
                                            to fabricate a jamming structure with wide-range stiffness, universal adaptability and high dexterity.
                                            Thus, the behaviors of wire/fiber jamming structures with different layouts, materials and wire
                                            arrangements are analyzed, and a theoretical model is developed to predict the effect of geometric
                                            parameters. Experimental characterizations show that the stiffness can be significantly enhanced
                                            in the bending direction, while the stiffness is smaller in the torsion direction. Additionally, by
                                            integrating Velcro strips into the design, a quick and detachable scheme for the stiffness-tunable soft
                                  actuator is achieved. Application examples exhibit high load capacity and good shape adaptability.
         
Citation: Bai, L.; Yan, H.; Li, J.; Shan,
                                            Keywords: wire/fiber jamming; tunable stiffness; detachable design; soft actuators; fiber reinforcement
J.; Hou, P. Detachable Soft Actuators
with Tunable Stiffness Based on Wire
Jamming. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
app12073582                                 1. Introduction

Academic Editors: Giovanni
                                                  Soft machines fabricated with soft materials have been rapidly developed in recent
Boschetti and João Miguel da Costa
                                            years. They have proven to have great potential for applications in industrial robot manip-
Sousa
                                            ulators, medical devices, biomimetic robots, wearable exoskeletons and aerospace struc-
                                            tures [1–5]. The Young’s modulus of soft materials is defined in the order of 104 –109 Pa [1].
Received: 10 March 2022                     Compared with conventional rigid mechanisms, soft machines and actuators can handle
Accepted: 30 March 2022                     fragile or irregular objects without massive computations or sensing systems, and interact
Published: 1 April 2022
                                            with human bodies safely [6], but still carry with drawbacks due to their low stiffness
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral        and hyper-elastic properties. Soft actuators are unsuitable for working in areas with large
with regard to jurisdictional claims in     load capacity, high-speed motion and precise control. Many soft robots can be stiffened
published maps and institutional affil-     by simply increasing air pressure, reducing size, adding rigid components or using higher
iations.                                    hardness materials [7–9]. However, these solutions have limited effect and may lead to
                                            reduced flexibility.
                                                  In order to address these drawbacks, researchers have focused on developing stiffness
                                            tunable materials and structures such as shape memory alloys (SMAs), shape memory
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
                                            polymers (SMPs), low melting point alloys and jamming structures [10–14]. Among these
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                            stiffness-tunable schemes, jamming structures are favored by scholars owing to their advan-
This article is an open access article
                                            tages of structure simplicity, ease of fabrication and wide range of stiffness variation. Two
distributed under the terms and
                                            main types of jamming structures, granular and laminar jamming structures, have been ex-
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                            tensively studied [15]. Granular jamming consists of particle elements such as grains, coffee
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                            grounds, hollow spheres or interlocked granular particles in an airtight envelope [13,16–18].
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
                                            The jamming principle is to change the particles from a flowing state to a solid-like state by




Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12073582                                                     https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                               2 of 14




                            applying vacuum pressure or external force [19,20]. These granular jamming mechanisms
                            have been integrated into soft actuators and soft robotic grippers, which fit well on irregular
                            surfaces and provide significant stiffness tunability [21–23]. However, passive jamming
                            of particles due to bending behavior can reduce the bending range of the integrated soft
                            actuator [22]. Depending on the applications, there are challenges in selecting the optimal
                            particle size, shape and material. For example, smaller irregular particles lead to poor
                            fluidity and thus affect the flexibility of the jamming structure, while larger particles reduce
                            the compliance to object shape. In addition, it is difficult to resist significant tensile stresses
                            with vacuum-driven granular jamming structures [24]. Laminar jamming structures, also
                            known as layer jamming, are developed using papers or other flexible layers [25–27]. When
                            vacuum pressure is applied, the raised friction between the layers will prevent them from
                            sliding against each other. The tunable-impedance mechanisms based on laminar jam-
                            ming were well studied by Narang et al. [28–30]. The layer jamming structure exhibits
                            beam-like deflection characteristics when the vacuum pressure is open, showing a higher
                            performance-to-mass ratio compared to other variable stiffness structures. In addition,
                            layer jamming has a compact structure often applied to slender soft robots. However, these
                            stacked planar layers are only suitable for movement in a single plane. The deformability of
                            layer jamming is lower than that of granular jamming. Therefore, a reconfigurable jamming
                            skin has been designed [31]. This structure consists mainly of small overlapping sheets that
                            allow for stretching and 3D deformation. However, this structure is more complex, and
                            some mechanical problems still need to be optimized.
                                   Recent investigations have shown that fiber jamming is an alternate scheme for tunable
                            stiffness mechanisms in which fibers or wires are used as the jamming medium [32,33].
                            Fiber jamming, which can also be called wire jamming [34], exhibits features similar to
                            granular jamming and layer jamming in cross-sectional and axial planes, respectively.
                            Based on the characteristics of fiber jamming, researchers presented three arrangement
                            options and applied fiber jamming transition to a manipulator [35,36]. In addition, hybrid
                            jamming structures have been reported, consisting of two or more different jamming
                            media. Therefore, these hybrid structures combine the advantages of different jamming
                            schemes [37–39]. At present, the research areas of fiber jamming and hybrid jamming are
                            still in their infancy and many factors have not been studied.
                                   During the design of soft actuators and stiffness-tunable structures, 3D printing tech-
                            nology provides an excellent, systematic tool to directly fabricate structures with elas-
                            tomeric materials [11,26,40]. Bastola et al. [41] developed soft robots that mimicked cactus
                            stem geometries and used 3D printing technology to fabricate thin elastomeric layers.
                            In order to solve the problem of fabricating soft actuators with complex inner geome-
                            try, a method of 3D printing with fused deposition modelling (FDM) is proposed [42].
                            Ma et al. [43] presented a magnetic multi-material printing technique and fabricated soft
                            programmable composites with tunable Poisson’s ratio and shiftable mechanical behaviors.
                            However, current 3D printing technology still has some limitations, such as speed, material
                            compatibility and resolution [40]. Therefore, further research is needed for 3D printing
                            materials and printing devices applied to soft robots. To further study the properties of
                            the stiffness tunability of wire/fiber jamming structures and explore their applications
                            (Figure 1a,b), we propose a paradigm to design and fabricate a type of tunable-stiffness soft
                            actuator based on wire/fiber jamming. The stiffness-tunable soft actuator mainly consists
                            of a soft pneumatic actuator and a wire/fiber jamming mechanism. Through rigorous
                            analysis of various operating conditions, a new wire jamming structure with flexible 3D
                            bending capability and a wide range of stiffness variation is developed to meet the needs
                            of different applications. Bending and torsion experiments are carried out to investigate
                            the performance of our wire jamming mechanisms, and the results show a remarkable rise
                            in bending stiffness under vacuum pressure.
                            and stretchable properties, and applied them to wearable sensors and bionic gloves.
                            Cheraghi Bidsorkhi et al. [49] designed a waterproof and flexible nanocomposite
                            membrane and attached it to a commercial glove to detect joint movements. Compared
                            with these gloves, the soft gloves designed in this paper not only have the function of
                            tuning their stiffness but also can add or replace sensing and driving devices according to
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                        3 of 14
                            different needs. However, Velcro is not stretchable, so its use limits the application of
                            some materials in soft gloves.




                            Figure 1.
                            Figure   1. Application
                                        Applicationscenarios
                                                      scenariosand
                                                                 andcharacteristics
                                                                      characteristics  analysis
                                                                                     analysis    of the
                                                                                              of the softsoft pneumatic
                                                                                                          pneumatic     actuators.
                                                                                                                    actuators. (a,b)(a,b)
                                                                                                                                     Soft
                            Soft actuators are applied to a robotic gripper and a wearable exoskeleton. (c) Bending display of a
                            actuators are applied to a robotic gripper and a wearable exoskeleton. (c) Bending display of a fiber-
                            fiber-reinforced soft actuator with rectangular cross-section, where Pin is the air pressure. (d) FE
                            reinforced soft actuator with rectangular cross-section, where Pin is the air pressure. (d) FE simulation
                            simulation of the fiber-reinforced soft actuator (Pin = 64 kPa), where the air channel modeling is
                            of the fiber-reinforced
                            ignored,   and the fiberssoft
                                                       areactuator
                                                           hidden (P in = the
                                                                   from    64 kPa), where the air channel modeling is ignored, and the
                                                                              results.
                            fibers are hidden from the results.
                            2. Materials and Methods
                                  In this study, a fiber-reinforced pneumatic actuator is used as a driving unit because it
                            2.1. only
                            not  Designhasof aWire  Jammingbut
                                               flat surface Structures
                                                               also has a smaller expansion coefficient under air pressure
                            (Figure 1c) [44–46]. To understand the bending performance of the fiber-reinforced actuator,
                            we develop a theoretical model and determined the geometric parameters of the soft
                            actuator (Section S1 and Figures S1 and S2 Supplementary Materials) [45]. In addition,
                            uniaxial tensile tests are conducted to analyze the tensile properties of silicone rubber (see
                            Section S2 and Figure S3 in the Supplementary Materials for details). The bending state
                            of the actuator can be obtained from FE simulation results (Figure 1d). Since both the
                            inner chamber structure and the outer structure are quite simple, the fiber-reinforced soft
                            actuators are fabricated by 3D-printed molds.
                                  In order to improve the flexibility and universal adaptability, we use a modular ap-
                            proach by integrating Velcro into the design of variable stiffness actuators, where the
                            Velcro acts as an inextensible layer as well as a standardized connector for the actuator
                            and wire jamming mechanism. Because of the advantages of rapidity, convenience and
                            reliability, this paper applies Velcro to wearable devices, such as detachable soft gloves.
                            At present, scholars have developed a variety of functional gloves. For example, Kadu-
                            mudi et al. [47,48] developed multifunctional materials with self-healing, conductive and
                            stretchable properties, and applied them to wearable sensors and bionic gloves. Cheraghi
                            Bidsorkhi et al. [49] designed a waterproof and flexible nanocomposite membrane and
                            attached it to a commercial glove to detect joint movements. Compared with these gloves,
                            the soft gloves designed in this paper not only have the function of tuning their stiffness but
                            also can add or replace sensing and driving devices according to different needs. However,
                            Velcro is not stretchable, so its use limits the application of some materials in soft gloves.

                            2. Materials and Methods
                            2.1. Design of Wire Jamming Structures
                                 In order to achieve wire jamming structures with high load capacity, good reversibility
                            and universal adaptability, many critical factors such as installation layouts, materials and
                            dimensions, and wire arrangements need to be explored. As shown in Figure 2a, there
                            are three candidate layouts for the wire jamming structures, where the main body and
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                              4 of 14




                                   the limiting layer represent the fiber-reinforced actuator. Comparing these three layouts,
                                   we can find that layout 2 does not cause severe compression or stretching after bending
                                   (Figure 2b,c), and therefore the internal structure design is the simplest (see Section S3
                                   and Figure S4 in the Supplementary Materials for details). To realize the function of jam-
                                   ming or shape-locking, we should choose inextensible materials. Here, we propose three
                                   different materials (kraft rope, hemp rope and nylon wire) as optional jamming media,
                                   which have different bending stiffness, surface friction characteristics and twisting methods
                                   (Figure 2d, and see details in Figure S5 in the Supplementary Materials). It should be
                                   mentioned that the diameter of wires affects many properties. Smaller wire diameters
                                   may result in severe localized geometric jamming and rearrangement, while larger di-
                                   ameters result in poor flexibility and a small range of stiffness. Therefore, considering
                                   the jamming properties of the fiber-reinforced soft actuator, we empirically choose 1 mm
                                   diameter wires as the jamming material. Figure 2e,f shows two popular wire arrangement
                                   schemes. Compared to the rectangular arrangement, the circular arrangement is more
                                   prone to wire circumferential sliding after the bending, which we have observed by making
                                   samples. This circumferential sliding of wires may lead to misalignment and pre-jamming
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                     5 of 15
                                   (Figure S6, Supplementary Materials). Therefore, we choose the rectangular arrangement
                                   as the final solution.




                               Figure2.
                               Figure  2. Design
                                          Design and
                                                   and analysis
                                                         analysis of
                                                                  of Wire
                                                                     Wire jamming
                                                                           jamming structures.
                                                                                   structures. (a)
                                                                                               (a) Installation
                                                                                                   Installation methods
                                                                                                                methods for
                                                                                                                          for wire
                                                                                                                              wire jamming
                                                                                                                                     jamming
                               structures. (b,c)
                               structures. (b,c) Illustration
                                                  Illustration of
                                                                of wire
                                                                   wire jamming
                                                                         jamming structures
                                                                                 structures under
                                                                                             under bending
                                                                                                     bending state,
                                                                                                               state, where
                                                                                                                      where d,
                                                                                                                            d, H,
                                                                                                                               H, l,l, θ,
                                                                                                                                       θ,RRare
                                                                                                                                            are
                               jamming structure thickness, actuator thickness, actuator length, bending angle and bending radius,
                               respectively. l1, l2, l3 are the maximum stretch or compression length after bending for layout 1, lay-
                               out 2, layout 3, respectively. (d) Demonstration of kraft rope (one-strand twisted kraft paper), hemp
                               rope (two-strand twisted rope) and nylon wire (PA6, Alead Rubber & Plastic Products Co. Ltd.,
                               Hangzhou, China). Scale bar is 1 mm. (e,f) Presentation of jamming arrangements of circular cross-
                               section and rectangular cross-section. (g) Two localized postures (twisting and arching) should be
                               avoided. (h) The trimmed free end weakens the gradient effect after bending. (i) Schematic opera-
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                     5 of 14




                            jamming structure thickness, actuator thickness, actuator length, bending angle and bending radius,
                            respectively. l1 , l2 , l3 are the maximum stretch or compression length after bending for layout 1,
                            layout 2, layout 3, respectively. (d) Demonstration of kraft rope (one-strand twisted kraft paper),
                            hemp rope (two-strand twisted rope) and nylon wire (PA6, Alead Rubber & Plastic Products Co. Ltd.,
                            Hangzhou, China). Scale bar is 1 mm. (e,f) Presentation of jamming arrangements of circular cross-
                            section and rectangular cross-section. (g) Two localized postures (twisting and arching) should be
                            avoided. (h) The trimmed free end weakens the gradient effect after bending. (i) Schematic operation
                            principle of the wire jamming structure. (j) Three main types of external forces. (k) Illustration of the
                            bending state of the wire jamming structure under applied force Fe .

                                 During the bending motion, another problem is also presented, seen in Figure 2f. Due
                            to the difference in bending radius, a gradient effect appears at the free end of the wires.
                            As expected, the membrane wrapped around the outside of the wires also shrinks with the
                            bending, in which the wires show an elongation-like phenomenon. When the wires reach
                            the top of the membrane, localized twisting or arching is inevitable (Figure 2g), leading to
                            irreversible deformation. Therefore, the internal length of the envelope should be slightly
                            larger than the length of the wires. A more effective method is to trim the wires at the free
                            end in reverse gradient, which does not require a large space inside the envelope. As shown
                            in Figure 2h, the trimmed wires weaken the gradient effect after bending. Based on the
                            above analysis, we choose the rectangular cross-section as the final wire arrangement and
                            use layout 2 as the installation scheme. Vacuum pressure is used as the actuation method
                            for wire jamming structures.

                            2.2. Modeling
                                  In this section, the stiffness characteristics of the wire jamming structure are further
                            analyzed using theoretical models. The wire jamming structure consists of an airtight
                            envelope, a vacuum line and wires. The principle of operation is to transform wires from
                            an unjammed state to a jammed state by changing the vacuum pressure inside the envelope.
                            The friction between wires is varied by the vacuum pressure, thus achieving a tunable
                            stiffness (Figure 2i). We present the three most common states, where F1 is the applied
                            force in normal working state, while F2 and T1 are often found in the applications of robotic
                            grippers and wearable exoskeletons, such as grasping irregular objects or joint rotation
                            (Figure 2j) [17,22,23]. The sliding between wires is relatively stable under F1 and F2 , but
                            the rotation under torque T1 complicates the contact surface between wires. Additionally,
                            these three states reflect the three rotational degrees of freedom (DOF) at the free end of
                            the wire jamming structure, the combination of which allows for a tunable stiffness in
                            three dimensions.
                                  In practice, the main bending state of the wire jamming mechanism can be referred
                            to as a cantilever beam, where one end is fixed to the platform and the other end is under
                            the force Fe . As shown in Figure 2k, n1 and n2 are the numbers of wires in thickness and
                            width, respectively. a is the distance from applied force Fe to the fixed platform, and v is
                            the deflection under the applied force Fe . Since the gap between wires cannot be neglected,
                            we assume that each wire acts as an independent beam when the vacuum is off. The
                            wires enter the jammed state after the vacuum is on. Thus, these wires are analyzed as
                            a single beam. According to the Euler-Bernoulli equation for the cantilever beam, we can
                            obtain a theoretical model (see Section S4 and Figure S7 in the Supplementary Materials
                            for details). The stiffness of the wire jamming structure is related to the number of wires,
                            the diameter of a single wire and the material properties. Moreover, it can be found that
                            stiffness increases remarkably with the increase of n1 . In order to quantify the effect of
                            geometric parameters on stiffness performance, as well as to address the assembly issues
                            with the fiber-reinforced soft actuator, we determined the dimensional parameters of the
                            wire jamming structure and the number of wires inside the airtight envelope (see Section S5
                            and Figure S8 in the Supplementary Materials for details).
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                               6 of 14




                                2.3. Fabrication
                                           The fabrication process of the wire jamming structure is divided into three main
                                    steps. As shown in Figure 3a, the first major step is to cut wires into a specified length
                                    (i.e., 150 mm) using a commercial laser cutting machine (T1, Diaotu Industrial Co. Ltd.,
                                    Shanghai, China). Due to the different packing and delivery methods (e.g., reel and car-
                                    board), wires or ropes require pre-cutting before being fixed on the working platform. The
                                    second major step is to fabricate the airtight envelopes with rectangular cross-sections. Con-
                                    sidering the layout and bending state of wire jamming structures, high-density polyethylene
                                    (HDPE) is adopted as the envelope material (see Section S3 in the Supplementary Materials
                                    for details). The HDPE film has high ductility and toughness, puncture resistance and
                                    excellent chemical resistance, as well as low friction, and is often applied to agricultural
                                    greenhouses. In Figure 3b, the HDPE film is cut into four strips and then the strips are
                                    combined into a rectangular cross-section structure using a heat-sealing machine (FKR200,
                                    Yinuo Packaging Material Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China). The third major step focuses on
                                    sealing the wires into the airtight envelope (Figure 3c). The specific method is to insert
                                    the wires from one side of the rectangular cross-section structure and seal one end. Fol-
                                    lowing the gradient effect solution discussed in Section 2.1, we trim wires and seal
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                     7 ofthe
                                                                                                                                15
                                    other end. Finally, a plastic hose coupler is installed on the wire jamming structure for air
                                    tube connection.




                                Figure
                                Figure 3.
                                        3. Fabrication
                                           Fabrication processes
                                                       processes of
                                                                  of the
                                                                     the wire jamming structure.
                                                                         wire jamming   structure. (a)
                                                                                                   (a) Illustration
                                                                                                       Illustration of
                                                                                                                    of cutting
                                                                                                                       cutting process
                                                                                                                               process of
                                                                                                                                        of
                                wires. (b) Heat  sealing process of rectangular  cross-section structure  using  HDPE   films (film thick-
                                wires. (b) Heat sealing process of rectangular cross-section structure using HDPE films (film thickness
                                ness 0.08 mm). (c) Assembly process of trimmed wires and airtight envelope. (d) Illustration of the
                                0.08 mm). (c) Assembly process of trimmed wires and airtight envelope. (d) Illustration of the soft
                                soft pneumatic actuator based on wire jamming structure, including local details of double-sided
                                pneumatic actuator based on wire jamming structure, including local details of double-sided Velcro
                                Velcro strip and knit loop fastener with pressure-sensitive adhesive.
                                strip and knit loop fastener with pressure-sensitive adhesive.
                                      An important issue that we also need to consider is how to combine the actuator unit
                                      An important issue that we also need to consider is how to combine the actuator
                                with the tunable stiffness structure. The traditional approaches are integrated designs or
                                unit with the tunable stiffness structure. The traditional approaches are integrated de-
                                permanent      adhesionadhesion
                                signs or permanent        [22,23,26].   These approaches
                                                                      [22,23,26].               reduce the
                                                                                  These approaches           reliability
                                                                                                           reduce         and versatility
                                                                                                                    the reliability          of
                                                                                                                                      and ver-
                                the whole     structure.  For   example,   the  whole    structure   needs   to be  replaced
                                satility of the whole structure. For example, the whole structure needs to be replaced          after  leakage
                                and
                                afterfouling,
                                       leakageas    well
                                                  and    as in the
                                                       fouling,      case of
                                                                  as well  as applications
                                                                              in the case ofwhere      multiple
                                                                                                 applications     jamming
                                                                                                                where          structures
                                                                                                                         multiple          are
                                                                                                                                     jamming
                                required.
                                structuresTherefore,     the modular
                                              are required.    Therefore,concept   is introduced
                                                                            the modular       conceptinto  the design ofinto
                                                                                                        is introduced      thethe
                                                                                                                                softdesign
                                                                                                                                      actuator
                                                                                                                                             of
                                with  tunable    stiffness, where    the  key  factor  is the   use of Velcro   strips  (a.k.a.,
                                the soft actuator with tunable stiffness, where the key factor is the use of Velcro strips        “hook-and-
                                loop  fastener”).
                                (a.k.a.,             Becausefastener”).
                                         “hook-and-loop         the loop side   fastener
                                                                            Because     theisloop
                                                                                               covered   with dense
                                                                                                   side fastener        fibers, itwith
                                                                                                                    is covered      can be  ro-
                                                                                                                                         dense
                                bustly   bonded    to the  silicone   rubber,  which     offers  numerous     possibilities
                                fibers, it can be robustly bonded to the silicone rubber, which offers numerous possi-        for  combining
                                rigid  and
                                bilities  forsoft materials.rigid
                                               combining       In order
                                                                    and to  confirm
                                                                          soft         the advantages
                                                                                materials.     In order to of confirm
                                                                                                              Velcro, atheset advantages
                                                                                                                              of tensile tests
                                                                                                                                             of
                                are  performed
                                Velcro,   a set ofto  compare
                                                    tensile  teststhe
                                                                    aredifferent
                                                                         performedattaching     methods
                                                                                       to compare      the (Figures
                                                                                                            differentS9   and S10,methods
                                                                                                                        attaching      Supple-
                                mentary Materials). Here, we use double-sided hook and loop fasteners (ONE-WRAP 29,
                                Velcro USA Inc., Manchester, NH, USA) as a strain-limiting layer of the fiber-reinforced
                                soft actuator, in which the main silicone body is cured on the loop side (Figure 3d). The
                                details of fabrication processes are available in Section S6 and Figure S11 in the Supple-
                                mentary Materials. In addition, knitted loop fasteners (velour 3165, Velcro USA Inc., Man-
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                             7 of 14




                            (Figures S9 and S10, Supplementary Materials). Here, we use double-sided hook and loop
                            fasteners (ONE-WRAP 29, Velcro USA Inc., Manchester, NH, USA) as a strain-limiting
                            layer of the fiber-reinforced soft actuator, in which the main silicone body is cured on the
                            loop side (Figure 3d). The details of fabrication processes are available in Section S6 and
                            Figure S11 in the Supplementary Materials. In addition, knitted loop fasteners (velour 3165,
                            Velcro USA Inc., Manchester, NH, USA) with an adhesive coating on the opposite side are
                            used for the wire jamming structure. Finally, with the detachable support of Velcro strips,
                            soft actuators based on jamming structures are capable of handling a variety of applications.

                            3. Results and Discussions
                            3.1. Characterization of Bending and Torsional Stiffness
                                  In order to investigate stiffness characteristics of wire jamming structures in terms of
                            response to deflection, vacuum pressure, thickness and rotation angle, three-point bending
                            experiments and torsion experiments are performed. Figure 4a presents the experimental
                            setup for three-point bending experiments, where a wire jamming structure is placed on
                            the support platform and an air tube (orange color) is connected to a vacuum system. The
                            vacuum is provided by a peristaltic vacuum pump (KVP8 PLUS-KB-S, Kamoer Fluid Tech
                            Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) and the vacuum pressure is controlled through a pressure
                            regulator (ITV2090-312BL5, SMC Corp., Tokyo, Japan). In this study, the force sensor moves
                            at a slow speed during measurement processes so that the applied force can be considered
                            equal to the elastic force generated by the wire jamming mechanism. Therefore, the stiff-
                            ness property can be reflected by comparing values of the force sensor under the same
                            deflection. Moreover, it should be mentioned that each test in this section is repeated five
                            times. As shown in Figure 4b, three different jamming materials (i.e., kraft rope, hemp rope
                            and nylon wire) presented in Figure 2d are tested, and all applied force-deflection curves
                            show an increasing trend in that the applied force increases as the deflection increases.
                            The detailed demonstration of hemp rope and nylon wire is presented in Figure S12 in
                            the Supplementary Materials. For each jamming material, two sets of experiments under
                            different vacuum pressures (0 kPa and −60 kPa) are performed. It can be seen that the
                            stiffness of all three materials has obviously increased after the vacuum is switched to
                            −60 kPa, proving that all these materials can be applied to wire jamming. Comparing the
                            results of these materials, kraft rope and hemp rope have similar stiffness characteristics,
                            while the stiffness of nylon wire is significantly higher than the other two materials. The
                            relatively low stiffness of hemp rope is probably due to increased frictional sliding and
                            spacing between ropes caused by thin fiber branches around the surface of ropes. Addition-
                            ally, nylon wire also has some issues, such as high initial stiffness (i.e., unjammed stiffness)
                            and localized rearrangement. Therefore, kraft rope is selected as the jamming material for
                            subsequent studies. To compare the performance of different jamming structures, we also
                            conduct the three-point bending test on layer jamming structures with the same dimensions
                            (Figures S13 and S14, Supplementary Materials).
                                  Moreover, Figure 4b shows that the curves exhibit good linearity at a vacuum pressure
                            of 0 kPa, while they show pronounced nonlinear characteristics after the vacuum pressure
                            decreases from 0 to −60 kPa. This phenomenon indicates that the jamming structures
                            are mainly governed by elastic behaviors before the vacuum is off, and friction takes
                            an important role in changing the stiffness characteristics after the vacuum is on. To
                            further demonstrate the above phenomenon and the change in stiffness, the experiment
                            is conducted by varying the vacuum pressure after the deflection reaches 11 mm. In
                            Figure 4c, it can be clearly observed that the jamming structure shows low stiffness and the
                            curve is very linear at a vacuum pressure of 0 kPa, while the stiffness is higher and shows
                            pronounced nonlinearity at a vacuum pressure of −60 kPa. Since there is a gap between
                            wires when the vacuum is off, the applied force has a period of decline after the vacuum
                            is on.
Appl.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12,
      Sci. 2022, 12, 3582
                     x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                     98 of
                                                                                                                                                              of 14
                                                                                                                                                                 15




                                   Figure 4.
                                  Figure    4. Characterization
                                               Characterization of   of bending
                                                                         bending and and torsional
                                                                                           torsional stiffness
                                                                                                        stiffnessof
                                                                                                                  ofwire
                                                                                                                     wirejamming
                                                                                                                            jammingstructures.
                                                                                                                                         structures.(a) (a)Experi-
                                                                                                                                                            Exper-
                                   imentalsetup
                                  mental     setupforfor  three-point
                                                       three-point        bending
                                                                      bending         stiffness
                                                                                  stiffness  teststests
                                                                                                    and and   detail
                                                                                                          detail      display
                                                                                                                 display  of wireof jamming
                                                                                                                                     wire jamming        structure
                                                                                                                                                 structure   using
                                   using kraft rope, where lw is the length of wires (range from 140 to150 mm), U is the width, Pw is the
                                  kraft rope, where lw is the length of wires (range from 140 to150 mm), U is the width, Pw is the vacuum
                                   vacuum pressure, and d is the thickness of jamming structures. (b) Applied force versus deflection
                                  pressure, and d is the thickness of jamming structures. (b) Applied force versus deflection curves of
                                   curves of wire jamming structures (d = 6 mm) using three different jamming media (i.e., kraft rope,
                                  wire
                                   nylonjamming
                                          wire and  structures
                                                       hemp rope) (d =at6 mm)
                                                                          0 kPausing
                                                                                  and −60three
                                                                                             kPadifferent
                                                                                                    vacuumjamming
                                                                                                               pressure.media    (i.e., kraft
                                                                                                                           (c) Applied         rope,
                                                                                                                                           force      nylon
                                                                                                                                                  versus       wire
                                                                                                                                                            deflec-
                                  and   hemp    rope)   at 0 kPa   and   −  60  kPa  vacuum     pressure.     (c) Applied    force
                                   tion curve with a vacuum pressure change at a deflection of 11 mm. (d) Influence of different con-versus    deflection    curve
                                  with
                                   finedavacuum
                                          vacuum pressures
                                                      pressure change       at a deflection
                                                                   on the bending              of 11The
                                                                                        stiffness.     mm.   (d) Influence
                                                                                                          thickness           of different
                                                                                                                      d is 6 mm.              confined
                                                                                                                                    (e) Influence         vacuum
                                                                                                                                                      of different
                                  pressures    on the bending
                                   confined thicknesses            stiffness.
                                                              on the   bending  Thestiffness.
                                                                                      thickness Thed isvacuum
                                                                                                        6 mm. (e)   Influence
                                                                                                                  pressure       of different
                                                                                                                             is −85              confined thick-
                                                                                                                                      kPa. (f) Comparison         of
                                   bending
                                  nesses  on stiffness   withstiffness.
                                               the bending      differentThe thicknesses     at a deflection
                                                                                 vacuum pressure                 of 15(f)
                                                                                                        is −85 kPa.    mm.     (g) A typical
                                                                                                                          Comparison             mechanical
                                                                                                                                           of bending           be-
                                                                                                                                                          stiffness
                                   havior
                                  with      curve of
                                        different      wire jamming
                                                    thicknesses           structures.of(h)
                                                                    at a deflection        15Experimental
                                                                                              mm. (g) A typical setupmechanical
                                                                                                                       for torsional     stiffness.
                                                                                                                                      behavior       (i) Compar-
                                                                                                                                                   curve   of wire
                                   ison  of the  torsional   stiffness   at  a rotation   angle    of 60°.  The  thickness    of all
                                  jamming structures. (h) Experimental setup for torsional stiffness. (i) Comparison of the torsionaljamming      structures    is 6
                                   mm. (j) Torque versus rotation◦angle curves under different thicknesses, where kraft rope is used
                                  stiffness at a rotation angle of 60 . The thickness of all jamming structures is 6 mm. (j) Torque versus
                                   as jamming material.
                                  rotation angle curves under different thicknesses, where kraft rope is used as jamming material.

                                         ToFigure
                                        In   further4d,understand
                                                           the applied  theforces
                                                                             bending     stiffness
                                                                                     of the   wire characteristics
                                                                                                        jamming structure    of jamming      structures,
                                                                                                                                    are measured        underwe
                                   present   a  conceptualized        curve   of  applied     force     versus     deflection
                                  three different vacuum pressures, where the tests use the same jamming structure with           (Figure    4g).  When      the
                                  avacuum
                                     width disofoff,  the As
                                                  6 mm.    wire thejamming
                                                                     vacuumstructure         is in an unjammed
                                                                                pressure increases          from −30 kPa   state,toresulting
                                                                                                                                    −85 kPa,in    thelow   stiff-
                                                                                                                                                       friction
                                   ness.  When     the  vacuum       is on,  the   jamming        structure      enters    a jammed
                                  between the wires increases, thus changing the threshold point at which the relative sliding            state   and   shows
                                   similar
                                  of        mechanical
                                      the wires   occurs. behavior        to the layer
                                                             With the vacuum              jamming
                                                                                     pressure      fromstructure
                                                                                                           −30 kPa[29].  to −The     jammed
                                                                                                                               85 kPa,           state can
                                                                                                                                          the sliding    pointbe
                                  occurs at deflections of 0.5 mm, 1 mm and 3 mm, respectively. This phenomenon is similara
                                   divided    into  three   phases:    (1) during    phase     1  (pre-slip     regime),     the  applied     force   shows
                                   rapid
                                  to      linear increase
                                     the experiments       withas wires
                                                                  the deflection
                                                                          of squareincreases,
                                                                                       cross-section  during
                                                                                                           [33].which     the wires
                                                                                                                   In addition,    weare     cohesive
                                                                                                                                         compare     the with-
                                                                                                                                                          force
                                   out slipping;
                                  versus            (2) during
                                           deflection     curvesphase       2 (transition
                                                                    for three    different regime),
                                                                                              thicknesses,  the growth
                                                                                                                   and theof    the applied
                                                                                                                              results            force slows
                                                                                                                                         demonstrate       that
                                   down
                                  the      and the
                                       applied        wires
                                                  force        start to
                                                         increases        slip. In thiswith
                                                                       dramatically        phase,the the    curve shows
                                                                                                       increasing              a remarkably
                                                                                                                       thickness    of the wirenonlinear
                                                                                                                                                    jamming
                                   characteristics;
                                  structure    (Figure (3)4e).
                                                           during     phase 3the
                                                               To quantify      (post-slip
                                                                                     bending  regime),
                                                                                                   stiffness theinapplied     force shows
                                                                                                                    the three-point            a slow
                                                                                                                                          bending        linear
                                                                                                                                                      test,  we
                                   increase,   similar   to the   characteristics     seen   when       the  vacuum       pressure
                                  defined bending stiffness as the ratio of applied force to deflection. Figure 4f compares            is off and   the  wires
                                   enter
                                  the     into a full
                                       bending          slip. of the jamming structures with different thicknesses, where the best
                                                   stiffness
                                         Figure
                                  stiffness        4h shows(i.e.,
                                              performance        the experimental
                                                                      bending stiffness  setup      for the
                                                                                               is 0.89    N mm      −1 ) is obtained
                                                                                                              torsional      stiffness forof wire    jamming
                                                                                                                                              a thickness     of
                                  8structures.   In order toincrease
                                     mm. The maximum             approximate        the real
                                                                           in stiffness         torsional
                                                                                          is nearly      sevencondition,
                                                                                                                  times after the  side
                                                                                                                                 the       with an
                                                                                                                                      vacuum          air hose
                                                                                                                                                  pressure    is
                                   coupler isfrom
                                  switched       fully0 to  −85 kPa.
                                                        locked     to the   right fixture,
                                                                         It should    be noted  whilethatthe
                                                                                                           the left   fixtureofprovides
                                                                                                                 thickness        the jamming torque     as the
                                                                                                                                                    structure
                                   servo rotates, leaving the front side of the jamming structure free to slide. Similar to the
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                            9 of 14




                            should not be too large, which would lead to an increase in the initial bending stiffness
                            (Figure S15, Supplementary Materials) and volume, as well as a more severe gradient effect.
                                  To further understand the bending stiffness characteristics of jamming structures, we
                            present a conceptualized curve of applied force versus deflection (Figure 4g). When the
                            vacuum is off, the wire jamming structure is in an unjammed state, resulting in low stiffness.
                            When the vacuum is on, the jamming structure enters a jammed state and shows similar
                            mechanical behavior to the layer jamming structure [29]. The jammed state can be divided
                            into three phases: (1) during phase 1 (pre-slip regime), the applied force shows a rapid
                            linear increase as the deflection increases, during which the wires are cohesive without
                            slipping; (2) during phase 2 (transition regime), the growth of the applied force slows
                            down and the wires start to slip. In this phase, the curve shows a remarkably nonlinear
                            characteristics; (3) during phase 3 (post-slip regime), the applied force shows a slow linear
                            increase, similar to the characteristics seen when the vacuum pressure is off and the wires
                            enter into a full slip.
                                  Figure 4h shows the experimental setup for the torsional stiffness of wire jamming
                            structures. In order to approximate the real torsional condition, the side with an air hose
                            coupler is fully locked to the right fixture, while the left fixture provides torque as the
                            servo rotates, leaving the front side of the jamming structure free to slide. Similar to
                            the bending stiffness, the rotational stiffness can be reflected by comparing values of
                            the torque sensor under the same rotation angle. As shown in Figure 4i, two jamming
                            structures made of nylon wire and kraft paper (i.e., layer jamming material) are introduced
                            as a comparison. The experimental results reveal that the torsional stiffness of the layer
                            jamming structure is the highest before and after the vacuum is turned on. In fact, we
                            prefer to have lower torsional impedance for good shape adaptivity in the unjammed state
                            and higher impedance for a robust grasp in the jammed state. Therefore, according to
                            the experimental results, the wire jamming structure made of nylon wires has the best
                            performance. In order to improve the torsional stiffness performance of kraft rope, we
                            perform torsional experiments of different thicknesses (Figure 4j). Compared to the wire
                            jamming structure using kraft rope material in Figure 4i, the maximum torsional stiffness
                            of the wire jamming structure using 8 mm thickness improved from 32.63 to 47.5 N·mm,
                            and the torsional stiffness range improved from 1.88 to 2.02. The results also show that the
                            torque increases linearly with the angle from 0◦ to 60◦ , and the torsional stiffness increases
                            as the thickness d increases. A comprehensive analysis in terms of the performance of initial
                            stiffness, stiffness range, localized rearrangement and mass is presented in Figure S16
                            in Supplementary Materials. For the same dimensions, the layer jamming structure is
                            better than the wire jamming structure in both the initial bending stiffness and the range
                            of bending stiffness. However, the torsional stiffness performance of the wire jamming
                            structure is better than that of the layer jamming structure. Therefore, the layer jamming
                            structure is suitable for bending motions in a single plane. The wire jamming structure
                            can be flexibly bent and twisted in multiple directions, which is well suited for surgical
                            manipulators and wearable devices that multiple degrees of freedom of motion are required.
                            In the end, a wire jamming structure made of kraft rope with a thickness of 8 mm is selected
                            as the subsequent application study. A video of experimental platforms and stiffness
                            performance experiments is available in Movie S1 in Supplementary Materials.

                            3.2. Applications
                                  In the previous section, we used three-point bending experiments and torsional stiff-
                            ness experiments to study the stiffness performance of wire jamming structures. In this
                            section, we first investigate the influence of the wire jamming structure on the bending and
                            stiffness performance of a single assembled stiffness-tunable soft actuator, and then use
                            the soft robotic gripper and wearable exoskeleton as application examples to demonstrate
                            its load capacity and universal adaptability. Figure 5a,b illustrates the unloaded bending
                            experiments of a fiber-reinforced soft actuator and an assembled stiffness-tunable soft
                            actuator, respectively. The results show a significant decrease in bending performance after
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                             10 of 14




                                    the soft actuator is assembled with a wire jamming structure (Figure 5c). For a bending
                                    angle of 90◦ , the assembled soft actuator requires a positive air pressure of 145 kPa, while
                                    only about 87 kPa is required for the soft actuator alone. In order to explore the stiffness
                                    characteristics of the assembled soft actuator, we apply an external force to the tip of the
                                    actuator and record the force versus deflection curves at the contact point (Figure 5d,e). The
                                    experimental process is first to adjust the positive air pressure of the soft actuator to allow
                                    it to bend freely, then adjust the vacuum pressure of the wire jamming structure and finally
                                    adjust the initial position of the load cell so that it moves in a direction perpendicular to the
                                    contact surface. The experimental results show a phenomenon similar to the three-point
                                    bending experiment (Figure 5f). After the vacuum air pressure inside the jamming struc-
                                    ture is switched from 0 to −85 kPa, the bending stiffness of the assembled soft actuator is
                                    remarkably enhanced. In addition, bending stiffness experiments are performed on11a single
  Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                       of 15
                                    wire jamming structure. The details of the experiments are shown in Figures S17 and S18 in
                                    the Supplementary Materials.




                                  Figure 5. Applications of an assembled soft actuator with tunable stiffness. (a,b) Experimental setup
                                Figure   5. Applications of an assembled soft actuator with tunable stiffness. (a,b) Experimental setup for
                                  for a single soft actuator and an assembled soft actuator installed with a wire jamming structure,
                                a respectively.
                                  single soft actuator and angyroscope
                                                 A nine-axis  assembled(JY901S,
                                                                        soft actuator installed
                                                                                 WitMotion      with
                                                                                              Co.    a wire
                                                                                                  Ltd.,     jamming
                                                                                                        Shenzhen,     structure,
                                                                                                                  China)  is usedrespectively.
                                                                                                                                   to meas-
                                  ure the bending angle with different inflation pressure. The gyroscope is attached to the tip of the
                                  soft actuator. (c) Angle versus positive air pressure Pin curves of the soft actuator before and after
                                  assembly. (d,e) Bending stiffness experiments of the assembled soft actuator under two different
                                  positive air pressures. (f) Applied force versus deflection curves of the bending stiffness experi-
                                  ments. (g) Demonstration of the grasping process of the soft robotic gripper. (h) Comparison of
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                   11 of 14




                            A nine-axis gyroscope (JY901S, WitMotion Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China) is used to measure the
                            bending angle with different inflation pressure. The gyroscope is attached to the tip of the soft
                            actuator. (c) Angle versus positive air pressure Pin curves of the soft actuator before and after
                            assembly. (d,e) Bending stiffness experiments of the assembled soft actuator under two different
                            positive air pressures. (f) Applied force versus deflection curves of the bending stiffness experiments.
                            (g) Demonstration of the grasping process of the soft robotic gripper. (h) Comparison of maximum
                            grasping mass at different positive air pressures. (i) An application example of a wearable exoskeleton,
                            which only shows the wearing effect on the right arm. (j) The experiment of load capacity of
                            a detachable soft glove, where the positive air pressure is 165 kPa, and the vacuum pressure is
                            −85 kPa.

                                  To further demonstrate the versatility of the soft assembly actuator with tunable
                            stiffness, we developed a soft robotic gripper, which consists of three assembled soft
                            actuators. The experimental scheme is to grasp a hollow plastic carrier at a confined
                            positive air pressure, then set a specified vacuum pressure and finally increase the overall
                            mass continuously by adding steel balls until the grasping fails (Figure 5g). A video of
                            the grasping demonstration is available in Movie S1 in Supplementary Materials. The
                            maximum mass successfully grasped is recorded and shown in Figure 5h. The maximum
                            grasping mass of the soft gripper is increased by two times when the vacuum pressure
                            is changed from 0 to −85 kPa. Figure 5i shows an application example of a wearable
                            exoskeleton, where the yellow detachable areas use loops fasteners. The detachable sleeves
                            can be attached by simply turning the side with the dark Velcro (hook side) outward,
                            wrapping the yellow Velcro around the elbow and finally fastening the end of the yellow
                            Velcro to the dark Velcro. The inner and outer surfaces of the variable stiffness structures are
                            attached with loop and hook side Velcro blocks, respectively. Thus, the outer surface with
                            the hook side can be fastened to the yellow area. Depending on the working conditions, the
                            detachable elbow sleeves and detachable gloves allow for flexible installation of different
                            numbers and performance of assembled soft actuators or only variable stiffness structures.
                            Figure 5j shows a typical application of the detachable glove that assists the human hand
                            in grasping heavy objects. In order to objectively test the grasping load capacity of the
                            glove, we use only an empty glove without human hands to participate in this experiment.
                            A video demonstration of the soft glove is available in Movie S1 in Supplementary Materials.
                            The experimental process is to first turn on the positive pressure and then grasp the empty
                            plastic bucket, then gradually fill the bucket with water until the grasp fails and finally
                            record the final weight of the bucket with water. The results show that the glove can lift
                            a load of more than 10,000 g when the vacuum is turned on, satisfying the needs of different
                            working environments and daily life.

                            4. Conclusions
                                  In this paper, an assembled stiffness-tunable soft actuator is proposed, which consists
                            of a fiber-reinforced soft bending actuator and a wire jamming structure. For the issues of
                            localized rearrangement and tip gradient effect in the bending state, we develop a structural
                            jamming scheme and design a fabrication process. With the help of Velcro strips, a quick
                            and detachable assembly of the soft actuator and the jamming structure is achieved. We
                            reveal the influence of vacuum pressure and wire thickness on the stiffness performance
                            of the wire jamming structure through three-point bending experiments and conclude the
                            trend of bending stiffness with increasing deflection. In addition, layer jamming structures
                            are fabricated to compare the performance of wire jamming structures in bending and
                            torsional stiffness. The results show that the layer jamming and wire jamming structures
                            are superior in bending and torsional stiffness, respectively. In order to understand the
                            performance of the assembled stiffness-tunable soft actuators, a soft robotic gripper and
                            a suit of a wearable exoskeleton are fabricated. Experiments on the soft gripper show low
                            bending and torsional impedance for good shape adaptivity in the unjammed state and
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                            12 of 14




                                  high stiffness for a robust grasp in the jammed state. The detachable soft gloves have also
                                  proven to be effective in enhancing stiffness, with one glove capable of lifting weights over
                                  10,000 g. Moreover, the stiffness-tunable soft actuators show excellent application prospects
                                  in medical devices, biomimetic robots and immersive haptic support for VR/AR.

                                  Supplementary Materials: The following Supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
                                  //www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/app12073582/s1, Section S1: Theoretical model of the fiber-
                                  reinforced soft actuator, Section S2: Uniaxial tensile test, Section S3: Installation layouts of tunable
                                  stiffness layer, Section S4: Analytical model, Section S5: Geometric design parameters of wire
                                  jamming structure, Section S6: Fabrication of the fiber-reinforced soft actuator, Figure S1: Illustration
                                  of a fiber-reinforced soft actuator in bending state, Figure S2: The influence of air chamber height h
                                  on bending angle, Figure S3: Uniaxial tensile test of the silicone rubber, Figure S4: Demonstration of
                                  installation methods for wire jamming structure, Figure S5: Demonstration of twisting methods for
                                  hemp rope and kraft rope, Figure S6: Local rearrangement of wires in cross-section view, Figure S7:
                                  Schematic of a wire jamming structure under external forces, Figure S8: Illustration of wires on the
                                  cross-section of the jamming structure, Figure S9: Comparative experiments of detachable solutions,
                                  Figure S10: Experimental setup for detachable solutions, Figure S11: Fabrication process of the
                                  fiber-reinforced soft actuator, Figure S12: Demonstration of wire jamming structures made of hemp
                                  rope and nylon wire, Figure S13: Demonstration of a layer jamming structure with three different
                                  states, Figure S14: Comparison of the wire jamming structure with the layer jamming structure,
                                  Figure S15: Applied force versus deflection curves of kraft rope at 0 kPa, Figure S16: Spider plot with
                                  three different jamming structures, Figure S17: Bending stiffness experiments of single wire jamming
                                  structure, Figure S18: Applied force versus deflection curves for a wire jamming structure, Movie S1:
                                  Demonstration of experiment platforms, stiffness experiments, grasping process and soft glove.
                                  Author Contributions: L.B. and H.Y. designed and fabricated the prototype; J.L., P.H. and L.B.
                                  performed the bending and application experiments; data curation and visualization, J.S.; writing—
                                  original draft preparation, L.B. and J.L.; H.Y. reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors have
                                  read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research was supported by the Key Laboratory of Vehicle Advanced Manufacturing,
                                   Measuring and Control Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Ministry of Education, China.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Data Availability Statement: Data will be made available from the corresponding author on reason-
                                   able request.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                                   of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
                                   in the decision to publish the results.

References
1.    Rus, D.; Tolley, M.T. Design, fabrication and control of soft robots. Nature 2015, 521, 467–475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Majidi, C. Soft Robotics: A Perspective—Current Trends and Prospects for the Future. Soft Robot. 2014, 1, 5–11. [CrossRef]
3.    Kim, H.; Choi, J.; Kim, K.K.; Won, P.; Hong, S.; Ko, S.H. Biomimetic chameleon soft robot with artificial crypsis and disruptive
      coloration skin. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 4658. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Li, G.; Chen, X.; Zhou, F.; Liang, Y.; Xiao, Y.; Cao, X.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, M.; Wu, B.; Yin, S.; et al. Self-powered soft robot in the
      Mariana Trench. Nature 2021, 591, 66–71. [CrossRef]
5.    Soliman, M.; Mousa, M.A.; Saleh, M.A.; Elsamanty, M.; Radwan, A.G. Modelling and implementation of soft bio-mimetic turtle
      using echo state network and soft pneumatic actuators. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 12076. [CrossRef]
6.    Huang, W.; Xiao, J.; Xu, Z. A variable structure pneumatic soft robot. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 18778. [CrossRef]
7.    Nagase, J.; Wakimoto, S.; Satoh, T.; Saga, N.; Suzumori, K. Design of a variable-stiffness robotic hand using pneumatic soft rubber
      actuators. Smart Mater. Struct. 2011, 20, 105015. [CrossRef]
8.    Zhang, J.; Wei, H.; Shan, Y.; Li, P.; Zhao, Y.; Qi, L.; Yu, H. Modeling and Experimental Study of a Novel Multi-DOF Parallel Soft
      Robot. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 62932–62942. [CrossRef]
9.    Manti, M.; Cacucciolo, V.; Cianchetti, M. Stiffening in Soft Robotics: A Review of the State of the Art. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag.
      2016, 23, 93–106. [CrossRef]
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                               13 of 14




10.   Cianchetti, M.; Calisti, M.; Margheri, L.; Kuba, M.; Laschi, C. Bioinspired locomotion and grasping in water: The soft eight-arm
      OCTOPUS robot. Bioinspir. Biomim. 2015, 10, 035003. [CrossRef]
11.   Zhang, Y.F.; Zhang, N.; Hingorani, H.; Ding, N.; Wang, D.; Yuan, C.; Zhang, B.; Gu, G.; Ge, Q. Fast-Response, Stiffness-Tunable
      Soft Actuator by Hybrid Multimaterial 3D Printing. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1806698. [CrossRef]
12.   Tatari, M.; Kamrava, S.; Ghosh, R.; Nayeb-Hashemi, H.; Vaziri, A. Bending behavior of biomimetic scale covered beam with
      tunable stiffness scales. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 17083. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.   De Falco, I.; Cianchetti, M.; Menciassi, A. A soft multi-module manipulator with variable stiffness for minimally invasive surgery.
      Bioinspir. Biomim. 2017, 12, 056008. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Zhong, Q.; Zhu, J.; Fish, F.E.; Kerr, S.J.; Downs, A.M.; Bart-Smith, H.; Quinn, D.B. Tunable stiffness enables fast and efficient
      swimming in fish-like robots. Sci. Robot. 2021, 6, eabe4088. [CrossRef]
15.   Aktaş, B.; Narang, Y.S.; Vasios, N.; Bertoldi, K.; Howe, R.D. A Modeling Framework for Jamming Structures. Adv. Funct. Mater.
      2021, 31, 2007554. [CrossRef]
16.   Jiang, A.; Ranzani, T.; Gerboni, G.; Lekstutyte, L.; Althoefer, K.; Dasgupta, P.; Nanayakkara, T. Robotic Granular Jamming: Does
      the Membrane Matter? Soft Robot. 2014, 1, 192–201. [CrossRef]
17.   Li, Y.; Chen, Y.; Yang, Y.; Wei, Y. Passive Particle Jamming and Its Stiffening of Soft Robotic Grippers. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2017, 33,
      446–455. [CrossRef]
18.   Wang, Y.; Li, L.; Hofmann, D.; Andrade, J.E.; Daraio, C. Structured fabrics with tunable mechanical properties. Nature 2021, 596,
      238–243. [CrossRef]
19.   Brown, E.; Rodenberg, N.; Amend, J.; Mozeika, A.; Steltz, E.; Zakin, M.R.; Lipson, H.; Jaeger, H.M. Universal robotic gripper
      based on the jamming of granular material. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 18809–18814. [CrossRef]
20.   Amend, J.; Cheng, N.; Fakhouri, S.; Culley, B. Soft Robotics Commercialization: Jamming Grippers from Research to Product. Soft
      Robot. 2016, 3, 213–222. [CrossRef]
21.   Wei, Y.; Chen, Y.; Yang, Y.; Li, Y. A soft robotic spine with tunable stiffness based on integrated ball joint and particle jamming.
      Mechatronics 2016, 33, 84–92. [CrossRef]
22.   Wei, Y.; Chen, Y.; Ren, T.; Chen, Q.; Yan, C.; Yang, Y.; Li, Y. A Novel, Variable Stiffness Robotic Gripper Based on Integrated Soft
      Actuating and Particle Jamming. Soft Robot. 2016, 3, 134–143. [CrossRef]
23.   Jiang, P.; Yang, Y.; Chen, M.Z.Q.; Chen, Y. A variable stiffness gripper based on differential drive particle jamming. Bioinspir.
      Biomim. 2019, 14, 036009. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Jadhav, S.; Majit, M.R.A.; Shih, B.; Schulze, J.P.; Tolley, M.T. Variable Stiffness Devices Using Fiber Jamming for Application in Soft
      Robotics and Wearable Haptics. Soft Robot. 2022, 9, 173–186. [CrossRef]
25.   Kim, Y.; Cheng, S.; Kim, S.; Iagnemma, K. A Novel Layer Jamming Mechanism With Tunable Stiffness Capability for Minimally
      Invasive Surgery. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2013, 29, 1031–1042. [CrossRef]
26.   Zhu, M.; Mori, Y.; Wakayama, T.; Wada, A.; Kawamura, S. A Fully Multi-Material Three-Dimensional Printed Soft Gripper with
      Variable Stiffness for Robust Grasping. Soft Robot. 2019, 6, 507–519. [CrossRef]
27.   Wang, T.; Zhang, J.; Li, Y.; Hong, J.; Wang, M.Y. Electrostatic Layer Jamming Variable Stiffness for Soft Robotics. IEEE/ASME
      Trans. Mechatron. 2019, 24, 424–433. [CrossRef]
28.   Narang, Y.S.; Degirmenci, A.; Vlassak, J.J.; Howe, R.D. Transforming the Dynamic Response of Robotic Structures and Systems
      Through Laminar Jamming. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2018, 3, 688–695. [CrossRef]
29.   Narang, Y.S.; Vlassak, J.J.; Howe, R.D. Mechanically Versatile Soft Machines through Laminar Jamming. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018,
      28, 1707136. [CrossRef]
30.   Narang, Y.S.; Aktaş, B.; Ornellas, S.; Vlassak, J.J.; Howe, R.D. Lightweight Highly Tunable Jamming-Based Composites. Soft Robot.
      2020, 7, 724–735. [CrossRef]
31.   Shah, D.S.; Yang, E.J.; Yuen, M.C.; Huang, E.C.; Kramer Bottiglio, R. Jamming Skins that Control System Rigidity from the Surface.
      Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2006915. [CrossRef]
32.   Liu, L.; Zhang, J.; Luo, M.; Chen, H.; Yang, Z.; Li, D.; Li, P. A bio-inspired soft-rigid hybrid actuator made of electroactive dielectric
      elastomers. Appl. Mater. Today 2020, 21, 100814. [CrossRef]
33.   Aktas, B.; Howe, R.D. Tunable Anisotropic Stiffness with Square Fiber Jamming. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
      Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft), New Haven, CT, USA, 15 May–15 July 2020; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 879–884.
34.   Kawamura, S.; Yamamoto, T.; Ishida, D.; Ogata, T.; Nakayama, Y.; Tabata, O.; Sugiyama, S. Development of passive elements
      with variable mechanical impedance for wearable robots. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics &
      Automation, Washington, DC, USA, 11–15 May 2002; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2020; pp. 248–253.
35.   Brancadoro, M.; Manti, M.; Tognarelli, S.; Cianchetti, M. Fiber Jamming Transition as a Stiffening Mechanism for Soft Robotics.
      Soft Robot. 2020, 7, 663–674. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.   Brancadoro, M.; Manti, M.; Grani, F.; Tognarelli, S.; Menciassi, A.; Cianchetti, M. Toward a Variable Stiffness Surgical Manipulator
      Based on Fiber Jamming Transition. Front. Robot. AI 2019, 6, 12. [CrossRef]
37.   Yang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Kan, Z.; Zeng, J.; Wang, M.Y. Hybrid Jamming for Bioinspired Soft Robotic Fingers. Soft Robot. 2020, 7,
      292–308. [CrossRef]
38.   Fitzgerald, S.G.; Delaney, G.W.; Howard, D. A Review of Jamming Actuation in Soft Robotics. Actuators 2020, 9, 104. [CrossRef]
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3582                                                                                                          14 of 14




39.   Matsushita, A.K.; Garcia, L.R.; Liu, Z.K.; Doan, J.; Meyers, M.A.; Mckittrick, J. Applying Bio-Inspired hierarchical design to
      jamming technology: Improving density-efficient mechanical properties and opening application spaces. J. Mater. Res. Technol.
      2020, 9, 15555–15565. [CrossRef]
40.   Wallin, T.J.; Pikul, J.; Shepherd, R.F. 3D printing of soft robotic systems. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 3, 84–100. [CrossRef]
41.   Bastola, A.K.; Rodriguez, N.; Behl, M.; Soffiatti, P.; Rowe, N.P.; Lendlein, A. Cactus-inspired design principles for soft robotics
      based on 3D printed hydrogel-elastomer systems. Mater. Des. 2021, 202, 109515. [CrossRef]
42.   Yap, H.K.; Ng, H.Y.; Yeow, C. High-Force Soft Printable Pneumatics for Soft Robotic Applications. Soft Robot. 2016, 3, 144–158.
      [CrossRef]
43.   Ma, C.; Wu, S.; Ze, Q.; Kuang, X.; Zhang, R.; Qi, H.J.; Zhao, R. Magnetic Multimaterial Printing for Multimodal Shape
      Transformation with Tunable Properties and Shiftable Mechanical Behaviors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 12639–12648.
      [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.   Jiang, F.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, X.; Cheng, G.; Zhang, Z.; Ding, J. Pneumatically Actuated Self-Healing Bionic Crawling Soft Robot.
      J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2020, 100, 445–454. [CrossRef]
45.   Polygerinos, P.; Wang, Z.; Overvelde, J.T.B.; Galloway, K.C.; Wood, R.J.; Bertoldi, K.; Walsh, C.J. Modeling of Soft Fiber-Reinforced
      Bending Actuators. IEEE Trans. Robot. 2015, 31, 778–789. [CrossRef]
46.   Connolly, F.; Polygerinos, P.; Walsh, C.J.; Bertoldi, K. Mechanical Programming of Soft Actuators by Varying Fiber Angle. Soft
      Robot. 2015, 2, 26–32. [CrossRef]
47.   Kadumudi, F.B.; Hasany, M.; Pierchala, M.K.; Jahanshahi, M.; Taebnia, N.; Mehrali, M.; Mitu, C.F.; Shahbazi, M.A.; Zsurzsan, T.G.;
      Knott, A.; et al. The Manufacture of Unbreakable Bionics via Multifunctional and Self-Healing Silk–Graphene Hydrogels. Adv.
      Mater. 2021, 33, 2100047. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.   Karolina Pierchala, M.; Kadumudi, F.B.; Mehrali, M.; Zsurzsan, T.G.; Kempen, P.J.; Serdeczny, M.P.; Spangenberg, J.;
      Andresen, T.L.; Dolatshahi-Pirouz, A. Soft Electronic Materials with Combinatorial Properties Generatedvia Mussel-Inspired
      Chemistry and Halloysite Nanotube Reinforcement. ACS Nano 2021, 15, 9531–9549. [CrossRef]
49.   Cheraghi Bidsorkhi, H.; D’Aloia, A.G.; Tamburrano, A.; De Bellis, G.; Sarto, M.S. Waterproof Graphene-PVDF Wearable Strain
      Sensors for Movement Detection in Smart Gloves. Sensors 2021, 21, 5277. [CrossRef]
