             buildings
Article
Experimental-Numerical Assessment of Mechanical Behavior of
Laboratory-Made Steel and NiTi Shape Memory Alloy
Wire Ropes
Peyman Narjabadifam 1,2,3, * , Neda Fazlalipour 1,3 , Somayeh Mollaei 1,2,3, * , Mohammad Momeni 4,5, * ,
Ali Saman Watandoust 1 , Mahdi Chavoshi 1,2 , Alireza Babaeian Amini 1,2,3 and Farshad Karazmay 1,2

                                         1   Department of Civil Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of Bonab, Bonab 5551395133, Iran;
                                             a_babaeian@ubonab.ac.ir (A.B.A.)
                                         2   Laboratory of Structural Earthquake Engineering (SEE-Lab), University of Bonab, Bonab 5551761167, Iran
                                         3   Center for Research on Seismic Resilience (CRSR), University of Bonab, Bonab 5551395133, Iran
                                         4   Department of Civil Engineering, Shahrekord Branch, Islamic Azad University, Shahrekord 8813733395, Iran
                                         5   Department of Engineering and Architecture, University of Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy
                                         *   Correspondence: narjabadifam.peyman@ubonab.ac.ir (P.N.); s.mollaei@ubonab.ac.ir (S.M.);
                                             m.momeni@sutech.ac.ir (M.M.)

                                         Abstract: The mechanical behaviors of laboratory-fabricated steel and superelastic shape memory
                                         alloy (SMA) wire ropes are assessed in this study through a comprehensive approach encompassing
                                         both experimental investigations and finite element (FE) numerical simulations. The assessment
                                         of steel wire ropes involves experimental scrutiny under sinusoidal cyclic loading and natural
                                         earthquake loading conditions. In parallel, SMA wire ropes’ behaviors are analyzed utilizing FE
                                         simulations employing the widely acknowledged ABAQUS software version 2020. The validation of
                                         all numerical simulations is undertaken against the experimentally observed behaviors. Moreover,
                                         full-scale steel wire ropes are subjected to shaking table tests to validate the simulations, facilitating a
                                         comparative analysis between the mechanical responses of SMA and steel wire ropes. The findings
Citation: Narjabadifam, P.;
                                         demonstrate that SMA wire ropes exhibit superelastic behavior akin to SMA wires, with marginal
Fazlalipour, N.; Mollaei, S.; Momeni,
                                         variations in overall response observed across distinct configurations, akin to steel wire ropes.
M.; Watandoust, A.S.; Chavoshi, M.;
                                         Furthermore, augmenting the helix angle of SMA wire ropes results in reduced stress and increased
Babaeian Amini, A.; Karazmay, F.
                                         strain when exposed to the El Centro earthquake scenario. Nevertheless, the mechanical response of
Experimental-Numerical Assessment
of Mechanical Behavior of
                                         SMA wire ropes closely mirrors that of a single wire.
Laboratory-Made Steel and NiTi
Shape Memory Alloy Wire Ropes.           Keywords: shape memory alloy (SMA); experimental-numerical assessment; steel wire ropes;
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567.                mechanical behavior; helix angle; quasi-static sinusoidal loading; earthquake excitation
https://doi.org/
10.3390/buildings14061567

Academic Editor: Boshan Chen
                                         1. Introduction
Received: 1 April 2024                        Cables are a type of structural element capable of resisting high tensile loads. They
Revised: 18 May 2024
                                         are formed by twisting multiple wire strands together and are referred to as a “cable” if
Accepted: 23 May 2024
                                         the diameter is less than 3/8 inch or one centimeter, and “wire rope” if the diameter is
Published: 28 May 2024
                                         greater. Reverse lay cables have wires twisted in the opposite direction to the strands
                                         in the cable, providing resistance to pressure and deformation but lower flexibility and
                                         wear resistance. Lang lay cables have wires twisted in the same direction as the strands,
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
                                         resulting in higher wear resistance. Cables have become increasingly important in civil
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.       engineering, particularly in bridge construction [1,2]. Hosseinzadeh et al. [3] investigated
This article is an open access article   the utilization of cable braces to control lateral displacement and enhance bending frame
distributed under the terms and          resistance. Shiravand et al. [4] studied the impact of cable rupture during earthquakes
conditions of the Creative Commons       and under uniform support excitation on the seismic response of cable-stayed bridges,
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://    considering nonlinear behavior.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/              SMAs are smart materials known for two remarkable phenomena: shape memory
4.0/).                                   effect and superelasticity. They can adapt to environmental changes and possess significant



Buildings 2024, 14, 1567. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings14061567                                       https://www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                           2 of 19



                           damping properties, dissipating energy during seismic events. The Martensite phase
                           induces the shape memory effect, enabling SMAs to recover their original shape upon
                           stimulation. The Austenite phase induces the superelastic effect, allowing SMAs to undergo
                           substantial deformations and revert to their original form when the stimulus is removed.
                           Both phenomena entail significant energy dissipation. Numerous studies have investigated
                           using SMAs for vibration control of civil structures. For example, Dolce et al. [5] examined
                           the advantageous characteristics of SMA-based isolation devices and systems for seismic
                           protection. They integrated the optimal mechanical traits of quasi-elastic and elastoplastic
                           devices, along with exceptional fatigue resistance and high corrosion resistance inherited
                           from NiTi-SMA. Han et al. [6] presented the energy dissipation principle of SMA wire
                           and developed an SMA damper device for structural control implementation. Corbi [7]
                           explored the advantages of SMA behavior in the dynamic response of structural systems.
                           They analyzed the impact of SMA tendons on the strength of an elastic-plastic structural
                           model subjected to horizontal shaking and vertical loads. McCormick et al. [8] utilized
                           superelastic NiTi shape memory alloy wires and bars to mitigate seismic vibrations in
                           buildings. Parulekar et al. [9] deliberated on the utilization of memory SMA dampers
                           fabricated from Austenite wires, particularly Nickel Titanium wires, for passive energy
                           absorption in earthquake engineering. Hu et al. [10] developed two innovative bracing
                           systems to enhance the seismic resilience of buildings. The Partially Self-Centering Brace
                           (PSB) combines NiTi-based SMA (NiTi-SMA) and iron-based SMA (Fe-SMA) U-shaped
                           dampers, where the NiTi-SMA provides self-centering capability and the Fe-SMA offers
                           energy dissipation, allowing flexible control of the self-centering function. In addition,
                           they [11] proposed the Hybrid Self-Centering Brace (HSB), which integrates NiTi-based
                           SMA U-shaped dampers and frequency-dependent viscoelastic dampers, with the SMA
                           dampers providing self-centering to avoid structural damage and the viscoelastic dampers
                           introducing velocity-proportional damping for nonstructural damage control. Both studies
                           concluded that these bracing systems have promising potential for enhancing the seismic
                           resilience of buildings. Although the cost of SMA components is higher than that of
                           traditional components, the latest investigations confirmed the life-cycle span benefits of
                           SMA-based braces with reduced initial costs [12]. Alternative configurations for SMA-based
                           superelasticity-assisted sliders (SSS) were proposed by Narjabadifam et al. [13].
                                 SMA elements are frequently employed to manage vibrations in structures, but the
                           manufacturing of large-diameter SMA bars can be relatively expensive. As a result, the use
                           of SMA cables made up of smaller-diameter wires has become a more cost-effective alterna-
                           tive. For instance, a 6.35 mm diameter Nitinol bar can cost around $400 per meter, whereas
                           a comparable 49-wire Nitinol cable with a similar outer diameter of 7 × 7 × 0.711 mm is
                           significantly more affordable at only $60 per meter [14]. This substantial cost difference has
                           driven researchers to investigate the performance and applications of superelastic SMA
                           cables, which can provide the desired vibration control and energy dissipation capabilities
                           at a lower manufacturing cost compared to large solid SMA bars.
                                 Beltran et al. [15] examined the mechanical characteristics and behavior of CuAlBe
                           strands and compared both twisted and parallel configurations under cyclic tension. Reed-
                           lunn et al. [14] conducted uniaxial tension experiments to investigate the superelastic
                           behavior of two Nitinol cable constructions: 7 × 7 right regular lay and 1 × 27 alternat-
                           ing lay. Their study revealed that the 7 × 7 construction behaves similarly to 49 straight
                           wires loaded in parallel, while the 1 × 27 construction exhibits different behavior due
                           to its larger helix angles. Additionally, the 1 × 27 construction is more compliant and
                           stable, trading decreased force for additional elongation. Carboni et al. [16] investigated a
                           multiconfiguration rheological apparatus that included Nitinol wires, strands, and steel
                           wire ropes. Their study explored various hysteresis phenomena resulting from interwire
                           friction, Nitinol phase transformations, and geometric nonlinearities. Ozbulut et al. [17]
                           performed uniaxial tensile tests and cyclic tests to evaluate the superelastic properties and
                           low-cycle fatigue characteristics of NiTi SMA cables, respectively. Their study demon-
                           strated that the SMA cable exhibited excellent superelastic behavior, with the capability
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                             3 of 19



                           to undergo deformations of up to 6% strain without residual deformations. Sherif and
                           Ozbulut [18] studied the tensile response and functional fatigue of a superelastic NiTi cable.
                           In their subsequent research [19], they analyzed a multi-layered SMA cable under cyclic
                           loading. Their findings demonstrated that the multi-layered cable displayed superelastic
                           behavior with minimal degradation at lower strain amplitudes. Moreover, the stress levels
                           and elastic modulus were reduced due to the multi-layering of the cable. Fang et al. [20]
                           conducted a comprehensive investigation into superelastic SMA cables, encompassing
                           mechanical behavior, annealing schemes, hysteretic modeling, and seismic applications.
                           Testing on 7 × 7 SMA cable specimens revealed satisfactory properties, with potential for
                           enhancement through moderate annealing. Shi et al. [21] explored the development of an
                           SMA-based hybrid self-centering brace that combines NiTi superelastic cables with vis-
                           coelastic dampers. The results indicate that the developed SMA-based hybrid self-centering
                           braces provide an average of 9% equivalent viscous damping with complete self-centering
                           characteristics, leveraging both self-centering ability and energy dissipation capacity. Ra-
                           joriya and Mishra [22] investigated the use of an SMA wire to reduce large-amplitude
                           oscillations in taut steel cables of cable-stayed bridges caused by wind. They analyzed the
                           dynamic behavior of the cable with and without the wire in free and forced vibrations. The
                           findings indicate that the SMA wire is found to effectively dissipate cable oscillation.
                                 Existing research on SMA ropes has largely focused on basic tensile tests and the cyclic
                           loading of specific rope designs. However, for practical applications, especially in seismic
                           contexts, it is crucial to thoroughly examine their performance under earthquake conditions
                           through computer simulations, experimental studies, or both. SMA materials, especially in
                           wire rope form, offer promising structural applications due to their super-elastic properties.
                           Despite this potential, current studies have predominantly investigated the direct tension
                           or cyclic behavior of SMA cables and wires, leaving a significant gap in understanding
                           their seismic performance. Given the innovative use of SMA wires for enhancing seismic
                           safety in structures, it is essential to conduct comprehensive studies on their behavior under
                           various cyclic and earthquake loading conditions. The present study aims to evaluate the
                           seismic behavior of SMA ropes with different layouts based on both computer simulations
                           and experimental investigations. This study aims to comprehensively investigate and
                           compare the dynamic performance of steel and SMA ropes with different configurations
                           using finite element (FE) analysis and shaking table modeling. To this end, the commercial
                           SMA rope’s behavior is simulated in ABAQUS [23], and the simulation is verified by
                           reference to the experimentally evaluated behavior. Subsequently, different rope layouts
                           are examined under earthquake excitation and quasi-static sinusoidal loading protocols.
                           To validate the simulations, shaking table tests are performed on full-scale steel ropes,
                           enabling a comparative analysis of the behaviors exhibited by SMA and steel ropes.

                           2. Research Methodology
                                As discussed in the introduction, SMA materials are attractive for structural applica-
                           tions due to their super-elastic characteristics, with SMA wire ropes being preferable for
                           their ease of production and wide applications. Most studies have focused on the direct
                           tension or cyclic behavior of SMA cables and wires. However, to ensure seismic safety in
                           structures, it is crucial to comprehensively study the behavior of SMA wires under various
                           cyclic and earthquake loading conditions, which is the main objective of the current study.
                           The materials had been ordered from “nimesis” (a leading French company) in mid-2013
                           referring to the advertised product name of “NTSE01” and no more specific material-related
                           information were unfortunately available from the manufacturer.
                                To fulfill the objectives of the investigation, the initial step involved the implementation
                           of FE simulation based on ABAQUS software to analyze the behavior of SMA wires. The
                           outcomes of this simulation were subsequently cross-validated against data obtained from
                           laboratory experiments. Following this, FE analysis was conducted to examine various
                           configurations of SMA wire arrangements subjected to sinusoidal and seismic loading
                           conditions. A parallel investigation was undertaken involving different configurations
                                 To fulﬁll the objectives of the investigation, the initial step involved the implementa-
                           tion of FE simulation based on ABAQUS software to analyze the behavior of SMA wires.
                           The outcomes of this simulation were subsequently cross-validated against data obtained
                           from laboratory experiments. Following this, FE analysis was conducted to examine vari-
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567
                           ous conﬁgurations of SMA wire arrangements subjected to sinusoidal and seismic loading
                                                                                                                         4 of 19
                           conditions. A parallel investigation was undertaken involving diﬀerent conﬁgurations of
                           steel wire ropes, enabling a comparative assessment of the performance between steel and
                           SMA cables. This comparative analysis facilitated the validation of the FE simulations for
                                 of steel wire ropes, enabling a comparative assessment of the performance between steel
                           SMA wire ropes through real-scale shake table experiments, speciﬁcally designed to sim-
                                 and SMA cables. This comparative analysis facilitated the validation of the FE simulations
                           ulate cyclic and seismic loading scenarios. Detailed elucidations are expounded upon in
                                 for SMA wire ropes through real-scale shake table experiments, specifically designed to
                           the subsequent sections.
                                 simulate cyclic and seismic loading scenarios. Detailed elucidations are expounded upon
                                 in the subsequent sections.
                           2.1. Experimental Assessment
                           2.1.1.2.1.
                                  Specimen   and Material
                                      Experimental Assessment
                                 A wire rope is a composite
                                 2.1.1. Specimen  and       structure composed of twisted steel wires, organized into
                                                      Material
                           strands and    wound
                                       A wire    ropearound     a core. These
                                                        is a composite         wirescomposed
                                                                          structure     are drawn ofto precisesteel
                                                                                                     twisted    dimensions    and in- into
                                                                                                                    wires, organized
                           tertwined
                                 strandsin speciﬁc
                                            and wound conﬁgurations
                                                             around a to   formThese
                                                                         core.    each strand.  Subsequently,
                                                                                         wires are               the required
                                                                                                    drawn to precise            num- and
                                                                                                                         dimensions
                           ber ofintertwined
                                   strands is helically     wrapped
                                                  in specific          around the
                                                                configurations     to core,
                                                                                      form which    may consist
                                                                                             each strand.         of various the
                                                                                                            Subsequently,     materi-
                                                                                                                                  required
                           als such   as synthetic
                                 number               or natural
                                             of strands            ﬁbers,
                                                           is helically    metallicaround
                                                                         wrapped      strands,the
                                                                                               or an  independent
                                                                                                   core, which maywire     ropeofcore
                                                                                                                       consist     various
                           (refermaterials
                                  to Figuresuch1). Inasthis study, or
                                                        synthetic   thenatural
                                                                         rope’s fibers,
                                                                                 wire size,  number,
                                                                                         metallic      arrangement,
                                                                                                  strands,             strand count,
                                                                                                           or an independent     wire rope
                           lay, and
                                 corecore   type
                                       (refer  to were
                                                   Figure determined
                                                             1). In this based
                                                                         study,ontheprior  research
                                                                                      rope’s         [14,24,25].
                                                                                              wire size, number, arrangement, strand
                                 count, lay, and core type were determined based on prior research [14,24,25].




                                                                             Core
                                                                                 Strand

                                                                                 Cable

                           Figure 1. Cross-section
                                Figure             schematics
                                        1. Cross-section      and diﬀerent
                                                         schematics         components
                                                                    and different      of theofwire
                                                                                  components    the rope.
                                                                                                    wire rope.

                                 The primary
                                       The primary objective   of theofstudy
                                                         objective             was to
                                                                         the study      comprehensively
                                                                                       was  to comprehensively   investigate     and compare
                                                                                                                        investigate     and compare
                           the dynamic
                                 the dynamicperformance
                                                   performanceof steel  and SMA
                                                                     of steel  and SMAropesropes
                                                                                              acrossacross
                                                                                                      various     conﬁgurations.
                                                                                                             various     configurations.The dis-The dis-
                           placement     and and
                                 placement      stress  responses
                                                     stress  responsesof these   ropes
                                                                          of these       were
                                                                                     ropes   wereexamined
                                                                                                    examined   under
                                                                                                                  underquasi-static,
                                                                                                                          quasi-static,cyclic,
                                                                                                                                            cyclic, and
                           and seismic
                                 seismicloading
                                            loadingconditions.
                                                       conditions.To  Toachieve
                                                                          achievethisthisobjective,
                                                                                          objective,sixsixtypes
                                                                                                           typesofofropes
                                                                                                                        ropeswerewerepurpose-
                                                                                                                                        purposefully
                           fully manufactured and subjected to testing. Additionally, numerical modeling andanalysis
                                 manufactured        and   subjected    to testing.   Additionally,     numerical      modeling      and     anal- of
                           ysis of the considered ropes were conducted as part of this study.
                                 the  considered     ropes    were   conducted     as  part  of  this study.
                                 In Figure     1, cross-section
                                       In Figure    1, cross-sectionschematics
                                                                        schematics depicting
                                                                                       depicting thethe
                                                                                                      various
                                                                                                        variouscomponents
                                                                                                                    componentsofofthe   the wire
                                                                                                                                              wire rope
                           rope are
                                 are provided.
                                      provided. The The first
                                                          ﬁrst rope
                                                                rope features
                                                                       features wires
                                                                                  wires with
                                                                                          with aa diameter
                                                                                                    diameter of  of 11 mm.
                                                                                                                       mm. An An identiﬁer
                                                                                                                                   identifier ‘A ‘A × B’
                           × B’ was
                                 was designated
                                       designated for      the other
                                                      for the  otherfiveﬁvetypes
                                                                             typesofofropes,
                                                                                        ropes,where
                                                                                                  where‘A’‘A’represents
                                                                                                                represents  thethe  number
                                                                                                                                  number         of
                                                                                                                                             of strands
                           strands
                                 andand‘B’ ‘B’  signiﬁes
                                            signifies   thethe  number
                                                             number      of of wires
                                                                            wires   inin  eachstrand.
                                                                                        each      strand.For      example,11×
                                                                                                           Forexample,              3, 11 ××7,7,11×× 19,
                                                                                                                                  × 3,
                                 and   1 ×
                           19, and 1 × 27 ropes were derived from a single strand comprising 3, 7, 19, and 27
                                              27  ropes   were    derived    from   a  single   strand   comprising        3,  7,  19, and  wires,
                                                                                                                                              27 wires,
                                 respectively.      The   1 ×
                           respectively. The 1 × 3 rope was a unilayer cable lacking a core, while all other ropes con-ropes
                                                               3  rope   was    a unilayer     cable  lacking     a  core,  while    all   other
                           sistedconsisted
                                   of single oforsingle    or multi-layered
                                                   multi-layered                 constructions
                                                                      constructions                 with an
                                                                                        with an inner     core.inner
                                                                                                                   Thecore.
                                                                                                                         7 × 7The       × 7 rope
                                                                                                                                rope7 (left   reg- (left
                                 regular   lay)  comprised     7  strands,   with  each   strand   containing
                           ular lay) comprised 7 strands, with each strand containing 7 wires, each with a diameter7 wires,   each   with   a diameter
                                 of 1 Additionally,
                           of 1 mm.   mm. Additionally,  it wasit assumed
                                                                  was assumed       that of
                                                                              that one    onetheofropes
                                                                                                   the ropes
                                                                                                         withwith          × 7 configuration
                                                                                                                 a 1 ×a71conﬁguration         was was
                                 a bundle.
                           a bundle.
                                       Figure 2 presents side-view images of six rope designs, accompanied by the measured
                                 helix angles of the individual wires relative to the global axis (z-axis) of the rope. It is
                                 crucial to note that the helix angles reported in Figure 2 differ from those documented in
                                 earlier research [14,24,25], where each rope layer featured a distinct angle. This difference
                                 can be attributed to the fact that the ropes in this study were manually woven, whereas
                                 previous studies focused on industrial ropes. It is noteworthy that the angles of the rope
                                 layers are all equal in this study.
                           ured helix angles of the individual wires relative to the global axis (z-axis) of the rope. It
                             ured helix angles of the individual wires relative to the global axis (z-axis) of the rope. It
                           is crucial to note that the helix angles reported in Figure 2 diﬀer from those documented
                             is crucial to note that the helix angles reported in Figure 2 diﬀer from those documented
                           in earlier research [14,24,25], where each rope layer featured a distinct angle. This diﬀer-
                             in earlier research [14,24,25], where each rope layer featured a distinct angle. This diﬀer-
                           ence can be attributed to the fact that the ropes in this study were manually woven,
                             ence can be attributed to the fact that the ropes in this study were manually woven,
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567   whereas previous studies focused on industrial ropes. It is noteworthy that the angles      of19
                             whereas previous studies focused on industrial ropes. It is noteworthy that the angles 5 of of
                           the rope layers are all equal in this study.
                             the rope layers are all equal in this study.




                             Z
                                   Z
                           Figure 2. Side-view images of ﬁve rope designs.
                             Figure2.2.Side-view
                            Figure     Side-viewimages
                                                 imagesof
                                                        offive
                                                           ﬁverope
                                                               ropedesigns.
                                                                    designs.
                                  The tensile test was employed to obtain the mechanical properties of a steel wire, as
                                    Thetensile
                                    The   tensile test
                                                    testwas
                                                         was employed
                                                               employed to  to obtain
                                                                                obtain the
                                                                                         the mechanical
                                                                                             mechanical properties
                                                                                                            properties of of aa steel
                                                                                                                                 steelwire,
                                                                                                                                       wire,as
                                                                                                                                             as
                           illustrated in Figure 3 and Table 1. In this study, the tensile test according to the ASTM
                              illustrated in
                             illustrated     in Figure
                                                 Figure 33 and
                                                            and Table
                                                                 Table 1.1. In
                                                                             In this
                                                                                 this study,
                                                                                      study,the
                                                                                              thetensile
                                                                                                   tensiletest
                                                                                                            testaccording
                                                                                                                  according to  tothe
                                                                                                                                    theASTM
                                                                                                                                        ASTM
                           A931 standard [26] was used to obtain the mechanical characteristics of the steel wires.
                              A931standard
                             A931     standard[26] [26]was
                                                         was
                                                           usedused
                                                                  to to obtain
                                                                     obtain   thethe    mechanical
                                                                                   mechanical         characteristics
                                                                                                 characteristics         ofsteel
                                                                                                                    of the   the wires.
                                                                                                                                   steel wires.
                                                                                                                                          This
                           This test involved ﬁxing the wire between two jaws in a tension device and applying force
                              Thisinvolved
                             test   test involved
                                                fixingﬁxing   the wire
                                                        the wire        between
                                                                   between     two two
                                                                                     jawsjaws
                                                                                           in a in a tension
                                                                                                tension        device
                                                                                                           device   andand    applying
                                                                                                                         applying         force
                                                                                                                                      force to
                           to one of the jaws, leading to the elongation of the wire until rupture occurred. Addition-
                              to one of the jaws, leading to the elongation of the wire until rupture occurred. Addition-
                             one   of the  jaws,   leading   to the elongation     of  the wire  until rupture    occurred.     Additionally,
                           ally, this study utilized a NiTi superelastic cable with mechanical properties detailed in
                              ally,study
                             this    this study
                                           utilizedutilized
                                                      a NiTi asuperelastic
                                                                NiTi superelastic
                                                                              cable withcable with mechanical
                                                                                            mechanical              properties
                                                                                                           properties   detaileddetailed
                                                                                                                                    in Table in
                                                                                                                                             2,
                           Table 2, sourced from prior research conducted by Hushmand et al. [24].
                              Table 2, from
                             sourced     sourced    from
                                                prior     prior conducted
                                                       research   research conducted
                                                                                 by Hushmandby Hushmand
                                                                                                   et al. [24].et al. [24].
                              Stress (N/mm2)
                            Stress (N/mm2)




                                                                 Strain %
                                                                   Strain %
                                        Stress–strainrelationship
                            Figure3.3.Stress–strain
                           Figure                      relationshipofofthe
                                                                        theutilized
                                                                            utilizedsteel
                                                                                     steelwire.
                                                                                           wire.
                             Figure 3. Stress–strain relationship of the utilized steel wire.
                           Table
                            Table1.1.Mechanical
                                      Mechanicalproperties
                                                 propertiesofofsteel
                                                                steelwire.
                                                                      wire.
                             Table 1. Mechanical properties of steel wire.
                                     Mechanical
                                        MechanicalCharacteristics
                                                    Characteristics                                        Values
                                                                                                             Values
                                                Mechanical Characteristics                                   Values
                                               Young
                                                 YoungModulus
                                                       ModulusEE [N/mm
                                                                   [N/mm22]]                              200
                                                                                                           200××1010
                                                                                                                   33
                                                Young Modulus E [N/mm2]                                     200 × 103
                                                     Poisson’s
                                                       Poisson’sratio
                                                                 ratio                                       0.3
                                                                                                               0.3
                                                       Poisson’s  ratio                                        0.3 −3−3
                                                    Density
                                                      Density[g/mm
                                                              [g/mm3]3 ]3                                7.85
                                                                                                          7.85××1010
                                                      Density [g/mm ]                                      7.85 × 10−3

                            Table 2. Mechanical characteristics of SMA [24].

                                                 Mechanical Characteristics                                  Values
                                        Martensite-to-Austenite start stress                                420 (MPa)
                                       Martensite-to-Austenite finish stress                                500 (MPa)
                                    Austenite-to-Martensite start reverse-stress                            300 (MPa)
                                    Austenite-to-Martensite finish reverse-stress                           200 (MPa)
                                            Phase transformation strain                                       6.5%
                                    Martensite-to-Austenite module of elasticity                         40 × 103 (MPa)
                                              Martensite-to-Austenite start
                                              Martensite-to-Austenite   start stress
                                                                              stress                                            420 (MPa)
                                                                                                                                420 (MPa)
                                             Martensite-to-Austenite   finish  stress
                                             Martensite-to-Austenite finish stress                                              500 (MPa)
                                                                                                                                500 (MPa)
                                          Austenite-to-Martensite  start reverse-stress
                                          Austenite-to-Martensite start reverse-stress                                          300 (MPa)
                                                                                                                                300 (MPa)
                                          Austenite-to-Martensite finish
                                          Austenite-to-Martensite finish reverse-stress
                                                                          reverse-stress                                        200 (MPa)
                                                                                                                                200 (MPa)
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                          Phase transformation   strain
                                                  Phase transformation strain                                                      6.5%
                                                                                                                                   6.5% 6 of 19
                                          Martensite-to-Austenite module
                                          Martensite-to-Austenite module of of elasticity
                                                                                elasticity                                    40 × 10 3 (MPa)
                                                                                                                              40 × 103 (MPa)

                            2.1.2. Testing
                            2.1.2.
                           2.1.2.   TestingProcedure
                                    Testing     Procedureand
                                                Procedure       andSetup
                                                                and    Setup
                                                                       Setup
                                   Inthis
                                  In
                                   In  thisstudy,
                                      this   study,an
                                            study,      anexperiment
                                                        an   experimentwas
                                                            experiment        wasundertaken
                                                                              was   undertakenin
                                                                                    undertaken      inwhich
                                                                                                    in whichaaasteel
                                                                                                       which        steelstructural
                                                                                                                    steel  structuralsystem
                                                                                                                           structural   systemwas
                                                                                                                                        system    was
                                                                                                                                                  was
                            positioned on
                           positioned
                            positioned      on the
                                            on    the shake
                                                  the   shake table
                                                        shake     table at
                                                                  table   at the
                                                                          at  theLaboratory
                                                                              the   Laboratory of
                                                                                    Laboratory      ofStructural
                                                                                                    of Structural Earthquake
                                                                                                       Structural      Earthquake Engineering
                                                                                                                       Earthquake      Engineering
                                                                                                                                       Engineering
                            (SEE-Lab)
                           (SEE-Lab)       at
                                          at   the
                                              the    University
                                                   University        of
                                                                    of   Bonab,
                                                                        Bonab,     located
                                                                                  located     in
                                                                                             in  the
                                                                                                the   East
                                                                                                     East   Azerbaijan
                                                                                                           Azerbaijan
                            (SEE-Lab) at the University of Bonab, located in the East Azerbaijan province of                province
                                                                                                                            province    ofIran.
                                                                                                                                       of  Iran.The
                                                                                                                                           Iran.   The
                                                                                                                                                  The
                            shake
                           shake     table   is  a  product      of  SANTAM         engineering      design   company
                            shake table is a product of SANTAM engineering design company [27] and the tests on
                                    table   is  a  product     of   SANTAM         engineering      design    company        [27]
                                                                                                                            [27]  and
                                                                                                                                  and   the
                                                                                                                                       the   tests
                                                                                                                                            tests    on
                                                                                                                                                     on
                            the
                           the   ropes
                                ropes     within
                                         within       the
                                                     the    steel
                                                           steel   structural
                                                                  structural      system
                                                                                 system      included
                                                                                           included      both
                                                                                                        both     cyclic
                                                                                                                cyclic
                            the ropes within the steel structural system included both cyclic loading and simulated       loading
                                                                                                                         loading     and
                                                                                                                                    and   simulated
                                                                                                                                         simulated
                            earthquakeexcitations.
                           earthquake
                            earthquake       excitations.
                                            excitations.
                                   The primary
                                  The
                                   The   primaryobjective
                                        primary        objectiveis
                                                       objective    isto
                                                                    is to design
                                                                       to  design aaa structural
                                                                           design     structural configuration
                                                                                      structural    conﬁgurationcapable
                                                                                                    conﬁguration        capableof
                                                                                                                        capable    of withstanding
                                                                                                                                   of withstanding
                                                                                                                                      withstanding
                            the
                           the   tensile
                               tensile     forces
                                          forces      exerted
                                                    exerted    bybythethe   embedded
                                                                         embedded          ropes
                                                                                        ropes      during
                                                                                                during       seismic
                                                                                                         seismic
                            the tensile forces exerted by the embedded ropes during seismic events. The design           events.
                                                                                                                     events.   TheThe   design
                                                                                                                                    design        pro-
                                                                                                                                             process
                                                                                                                                                 pro-
                            cess
                           focusesfocuses     on   identifying
                                      on identifying        the rope the  rope
                                                                        that     that
                                                                              generatesgenerates     the
                                                                                            the highest  highest     force
                                                                                                          force within
                            cess focuses on identifying the rope that generates the highest force within the structure,      within
                                                                                                                            the       the
                                                                                                                                structure,structure,
                                                                                                                                             thereby
                            thereby necessitating
                           necessitating
                            thereby     necessitating       the consideration
                                               the consideration
                                                            the  consideration
                                                                         of tension  offorces
                                                                                     of tension
                                                                                        tension
                                                                                                forforces  for that
                                                                                                                 thatrope
                                                                                                     that specific
                                                                                                   forces for          speciﬁc   rope
                                                                                                                             only.
                                                                                                                       speciﬁc          only.
                                                                                                                                    In this
                                                                                                                                 rope          In this
                                                                                                                                                   this
                                                                                                                                            context,
                                                                                                                                        only.  In
                            context,
                           the 7 × 7 therope7 emerges
                                                ×  7  rope   emerges
                                                             as           as
                                                                the critical  the  critical
                                                                                element      element
                                                                                           responsible  responsible
                                                                                                          for producing
                            context, the 7 × 7 rope emerges as the critical element responsible for producing the max-   for  producing
                                                                                                                              the maximum  the   max-
                                                                                                                                                force
                            imum force
                           within
                            imum     force
                                     the      withinAn
                                           system.
                                              within     theoverview
                                                         the  system. An
                                                              system.      An   overview representation
                                                                            representation
                                                                               overview       representation      of the
                                                                                                 of the experimental
                                                                                                                  of  the experimental
                                                                                                                           experimental      setupin
                                                                                                                             setup is depicted
                                                                                                                                             setup    is
                                                                                                                                                      is
                            depicted
                           Figure    4.  in
                                        This Figure
                                                figure  4.  This
                                                          provides ﬁgure
                                                                       a     provides
                                                                         zoomed-in       a  zoomed-in
                                                                                         view   of the     view
                                                                                                        middle
                            depicted in Figure 4. This ﬁgure provides a zoomed-in view of the middle section of theof  the
                                                                                                                   section  middle
                                                                                                                             of the   section
                                                                                                                                     device     of
                                                                                                                                              shown the
                            device
                           in Figure
                            device    shown      in Figure
                                         5, enabling
                                      shown      in  Figure    5, enabling
                                                          a closer
                                                               5,  enabling    aa closer
                                                                      observation closer  observation
                                                                                       of the              of the
                                                                                                central part
                                                                                          observation      of  the  central
                                                                                                                of the        part of
                                                                                                                         setup.
                                                                                                                    central   part  of the
                                                                                                                                       the setup.
                                                                                                                                            setup.




                           Figure4.4.
                           Figure
                           Figure 4.Overview
                                      Overviewof
                                      Overview ofthe
                                               of theexperimental
                                                  the experimentalsetup.
                                                      experimental setup.
                                                                   setup.




                           Figure 5.
                           Figure  5. Components
                                      Components of
                                                 of the
                                                     the steel
                                                         steel structure
                                                               structure system.
                                                                         system.
                           Figure 5. Components  of the steel structure system.

                                Figure 5 illustrates the components of the steel structure system requiring design,
                           each labeled with specific numbers. Profile number 1, spanning 500 mm, was designed to
                           accommodate the 7 × 7 cable force, with an IPE140 section chosen for additional robustness.
                           Connection between Profile 1 and the shaking table was achieved using G8.8 screws, 12 mm
                           in diameter, while attachment to the base plate utilized a 100 mm gusset and a 4 mm weld
                           for secure fixation.
                                Profile number 4, characterized by UNP200 with a length of 2850 mm, was obtained,
                           and Profile number 9 was designed to prevent any deflection in Profile number 4. The
                                each labeled with speciﬁc numbers. Proﬁle number 1, spanning 500 mm, was designed to
                                ness.  Connection
                                accommodate      the between   Proﬁle
                                                     7 × 7 cable   force,1with
                                                                           and the   shakingsection
                                                                                an IPE140      table was   achieved
                                                                                                      chosen           using G8.8
                                                                                                                for additional       screws,
                                                                                                                                robust-
                                12
                                ness. Connection between Proﬁle 1 and the shaking table was achieved using G8.8 screws, a 4
                                   mm    in diameter,   while   attachment     to the   base plate  utilized   a  100 mm    gusset   and
                                mm
                                12 mm weld
                                         in for securewhile
                                            diameter,   ﬁxation.
                                                              attachment to the base plate utilized a 100 mm gusset and a 4
                                      Proﬁle
                                mm weld     fornumber   4, characterized by UNP200 with a length of 2850 mm, was obtained,
                                                secure ﬁxation.
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567
                                and Proﬁle     number4,9characterized
                                      Proﬁle number        was designed    byto  preventwith
                                                                               UNP200       anya deﬂection
                                                                                                 length of 2850in Proﬁle
                                                                                                                   mm, was number
                                                                                                                              obtained,4. The
                                                                                                                                    7 of 19

                                connection
                                and Proﬁle between
                                              number 9Proﬁle      4 and Plate
                                                          was designed          5 (150 ×any
                                                                            to prevent     200deﬂection
                                                                                               dimensions)      was established
                                                                                                           in Proﬁle   number 4. through
                                                                                                                                     The
                                full welding,
                                connection      and subsequently,
                                              between  Proﬁle 4 and thisPlateplate
                                                                              5 (150was   connected
                                                                                      × 200            to the
                                                                                             dimensions)    was side column using
                                                                                                                  established  through  two 8
                                 connection between Profile 4 and Plate 5 (150 × 200 dimensions) was established through
                                full
                                mm   welding,   and  subsequently,    this plate  was   connected   to the  side  column
                                      diameter G8.8 screws. Proﬁles 7 and 8, consisting of plates with dimensions of 100   using  two    8 ×
                                 full welding, and subsequently, this plate was connected to the side column using two 8 mm
                                mm were
                                200,  diameter G8.8   screws.toProﬁles    7 and 8, consisting   of plates with dimensions       of 100 ×
                                 diameter also
                                            G8.8 connected
                                                  screws. ProfilesProﬁle
                                                                     7 and48,using   full welding
                                                                               consisting   of platestechniques.    More information
                                                                                                       with dimensions     of 100 × 200, re-
                                200, werethe
                                garding     also connected
                                               design        to is
                                                       details   Proﬁle  4 using
                                                                   presented    in full welding
                                                                                    Figure  6.    techniques. More information re-
                                 were also connected to Profile 4 using full welding techniques. More information regarding
                                garding the design details is presented in Figure 6.
                                 the design details is presented in Figure 6.




                                                  (a)
                                                  (a)                                   (b)(b)                        (c) (c)
                                Figure
                                 Figure6.
                                Figure     Details
                                       6.6.Details of
                                            Detailsof  the
                                                    ofthe  testing
                                                       thetesting  setupin
                                                           testingsetup
                                                                   setup  inshake
                                                                         in   shake
                                                                             shake    table
                                                                                    table
                                                                                     table   tests
                                                                                          tests
                                                                                           tests    (units:
                                                                                                (units:
                                                                                                  (units:   cm).
                                                                                                         cm).
                                                                                                          cm). (a)(a)
                                                                                                              (a)     Plate
                                                                                                                  Plate
                                                                                                                   Plate#2; #2;
                                                                                                                         #2;(b) (b)
                                                                                                                             (b)PlanPlan
                                                                                                                                 Planviewview
                                                                                                                                      view      of the
                                                                                                                                          ofofthe
                                                                                                                                               the
                                connection
                                connection   between
                                             between    proﬁle#1
                                                       proﬁle#1    and
                                                                 and   plate
                                                                      plate    #2;
                                                                             #2;   (c)
                                                                                 (c)   Proﬁle
                                                                                     Proﬁle
                                 connection between profile#1 and plate #2; (c) Profile #5.     #5.
                                                                                              #5.

                                      Special
                                      Special  rope
                                       Specialrope     fastenerswere
                                                rope fasteners
                                                       fasteners   wereemployed
                                                                  were      employed
                                                                         employed      toto
                                                                                       to    connect
                                                                                          connect
                                                                                          connect    thethe
                                                                                                    the     cables,
                                                                                                          cables,
                                                                                                         cables,   andand
                                                                                                                  and        their
                                                                                                                         their
                                                                                                                       their    types
                                                                                                                              types   types   and
                                                                                                                                               ca- ca-
                                                                                                                                         andcable-
                                                                                                                                       and
                                ble-tying
                                ble-tying   methods
                                            methods
                                 tying methods          are
                                                    areare   depicted
                                                            depicted
                                                         depicted   in ininFigure
                                                                             Figure
                                                                        Figure        7.
                                                                                 7.7.To  To  secure
                                                                                      Tosecure
                                                                                          secure      smaller
                                                                                                  smaller
                                                                                                 smaller        cables
                                                                                                            cables
                                                                                                           cables    likelike
                                                                                                                    like   the1the
                                                                                                                          the   1×× 313rope
                                                                                                                                       ×rope
                                                                                                                                          3 rope
                                                                                                                                               andand
                                                                                                                                              and
                                steel
                                steel   wire where
                                 steelwire   where suitable
                                             where              small
                                                      suitablesmall
                                                      suitable         fasteners
                                                                 smallfasteners
                                                                         fasteners were
                                                                                      were
                                                                                   were    unavailable,
                                                                                              unavailable,
                                                                                          unavailable,     analternative
                                                                                                          an   alternative
                                                                                                              an   alternativecable
                                                                                                                            cable cable
                                                                                                                                    waswasused
                                                                                                                                            usedat
                                                                                                                                           was   used
                                atthe
                                at      fastenerlocation
                                   thefastener
                                        fastener  location
                                                   locationtoto
                                                              toprevent
                                                                 prevent
                                                              prevent      slippage.
                                                                             slippage.
                                                                        slippage.      Medium-diameter
                                                                                         Medium-diameter
                                                                                     Medium-diameter          cables
                                                                                                            cables     required
                                                                                                                  cables   required
                                                                                                                     required      twofasteners,
                                                                                                                                 two      fasten-
                                                                                                                                         two   fasten-
                                ers,
                                ers,  whereas
                                     whereas
                                 whereas    1 ×117××and
                                                    77and
                                                       and  bundle
                                                             bundle
                                                         bundle     ropes,
                                                                      ropes,
                                                                   ropes,     with lower
                                                                                with
                                                                             with     lower
                                                                                  lower     cable  forces
                                                                                               cable
                                                                                           cable           and
                                                                                                      forces
                                                                                                  forces   and  aa reduced
                                                                                                              and   a reduced
                                                                                                                   reduced    risk  ofoffastener
                                                                                                                               riskrisk   of fastener
                                                                                                                                         fastener
                                slippage,   necessitated    only  one  fastener.
                                slippage, necessitated only one fastener.
                                 slippage,   necessitated    only  one  fastener.




                                 (a) 1 × 3 rope                                       (b) 1 × 19 and 1 × 27 ropes
                                 (a) 1 × 3 rope                                         (b) 1 × 19 and 1 × 27 ropes




                            (c) 1 × 7 and bundle ropes                                  (d) 7 × 7 rope
                           (c) 1 ×Figure
                                   7 and7.bundle ropes                                     (d) 7 × 7 rope
                                           Special rope fasteners that were used in the test.
                                Figure
                                 Figure7.7.Special
                                            Special rope
                                                    rope fasteners  thatwere
                                                         fasteners that wereused
                                                                             usedininthe
                                                                                      thetest.
                                                                                           test.

                                 2.1.3. Experimental Results
                                      The stress–strain and force–strain relationships of ropes under sinusoidal loading with
                                 a frequency of 0.1 Hz resulting from the shake table tests are shown in Figure 8. Based on a
                                 comparison between Figures 3 and 8a, it can be inferred that the maximum stress and force
                                 generated in a steel wire subjected to sinusoidal and pure tension loading exhibit similar
                                 values. More accurately, the yield stress is about 200 MPa for both loading scenarios.
                                               The stress–strain and force–strain relationships of ropes under sinusoidal loading
                                          with a frequency of 0.1 Hz resulting from the shake table tests are shown in Figure 8.
                                          Based on a comparison between Figures 3 and 8a, it can be inferred that the maximum
                                          stress and force generated in a steel wire subjected to sinusoidal and pure tension loading
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                  exhibit similar values. More accurately, the yield stress is about 200 MPa for both
                                                                                                                            8 ofloading
                                                                                                                                 19
        Stress (N/mm2)                    scenarios.




                                                (a) Stress–strain and force–strain curves of steel wire
        Stress (N/mm2)




                                                (b) Stress–strain and force–strain curves of 1 × 3 rope
        Stress (N/mm2)




                                                (c) Stress–strain and force–strain curves of 1 × 7 rope
                         Stress (N/mm2)




                                            (d) Stress–strain and force–strain curves of 1 × 7 bundle rope

                                             Figure 8. Cont.
BuildingsBuildings
          2024, 14,  x FOR PEER REVIEW
                   2024, 14, 1567
                                                                                                                                             9 of 19
                                                                                                                                         9 of 19
              Stress (N/mm2)




                                          (e) Stress–strain and force–strain curves of 1 × 19 rope




                                          (f) Stress–strain and force–strain curves of 1 × 27 rope
                  Stress (N/mm2)




                                          (g) Stress–strain and force–strain curves of 7 × 7 rope
                                   Figure 8. Stress–strain
                                       Figure               and
                                              8. Stress–strain   force–strain
                                                               and force–straincurves  of ropes.
                                                                                curves of ropes.

                                             According
                                         According       to experimentalevidence,
                                                      to experimental         evidence,ititcan
                                                                                             canbebeinferred
                                                                                                     inferred that
                                                                                                                that the
                                                                                                                     the maximum
                                                                                                                            maximumamount amount of
                                       of stress experienced   by  ropes   is equivalent   to  that of  a single wire
                                   stress experienced by ropes is equivalent to that of a single wire (i.e., about 290  (i.e., about  290  MPa).
                                                                                                                                               MPa).
                                       However, the maximum force experienced by 1 × 3, 1 × 7, 1 × 7 Bundle, 1 × 19, 1 × 27,
                                   However, the maximum force experienced by 1 × 3, 1 × 7, 1 × 7 Bundle, 1 × 19, 1 × 27, and
                                       and 7 × 7 rope configurations is 3, 7, 7, 19, 27, and 49 times greater than the maximum force
                                   7 × 7 rope conﬁgurations is 3, 7, 7, 19, 27, and 49 times greater than the maximum force
                                       experienced by a single wire, respectively. This is due to the fact that the force has been
                                   experienced
                                       distributedbyamong
                                                      a single
                                                             the wire,  respectively.
                                                                 cross-sectional    areas.This   is due
                                                                                            It should   beto  the fact
                                                                                                           noted         thattothe
                                                                                                                  that due          force has been
                                                                                                                                 unintentional
                                   distributed   among the cross-sectional
                                       reasons encountered                          areas. It should
                                                               during the data acquisition       process, besome
                                                                                                             notedofthat    duewere
                                                                                                                      the data    to unintentional
                                                                                                                                        missing,
                                   reasons   encountered     during   the   data   acquisition    process,
                                       resulting in the inability to plot the complete cycle in Figure 8g.    some   of  the   data  were missing,
                                   resultingThe
                                              in the inability
                                                 instability     to plot the complete
                                                              or fluctuations    observed in cycle
                                                                                                the in  Figure
                                                                                                    cyclic       8g. curve of the steel wire
                                                                                                            loading
                                       ropes  during   the loading   phase    can  be attributed    to  a combination
                                         The instability or ﬂuctuations observed in the cyclic loading curve               of different
                                                                                                                                  of thefactors.
                                                                                                                                          steel wire
                                       Frictional effects between   the  individual   twisted    wires,  the nonlinear
                                   ropes during the loading phase can be a ributed to a combination of diﬀerent           behavior   of the steel
                                                                                                                                             factors.
                                       material, geometric   nonlinearities   arising from   changes   in the rope structure,
                                   Frictional eﬀects between the individual twisted wires, the nonlinear behavior of the steel  manufacturing
                                       imperfections, and dynamic effects induced by the cyclic loading can all contribute to the
                                   material, geometric nonlinearities arising from changes in the rope structure, manufactur-
                                       observed instability. Those complex factors, acting individually or in tandem, lead to the
                                   ing imperfections,    and
                                       fluctuations in the     dynamic
                                                            loading        eﬀects induced by the cyclic loading can all contribute to
                                                                     response.
                                   the observed instability. Those complex factors, acting individually or in tandem, lead to
                                   the ﬂuctuations in the loading response.

                                   2.2. Numerical Assessment
                                        In this section, the ABAQUS FE software [23] was utilized to simulate the behavior
                                   of ropes under sinusoidal and seismic longitudinal displacements. Initially, the ropes
                                   were designed in SolidWorks using speciﬁcations from laboratory experiments and then
 Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                                                          10 of 19



                                   2.2. Numerical Assessment
Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                           10 of 19
                                          In this section, the ABAQUS FE software [23] was utilized to simulate the behavior
                                    of ropes under sinusoidal and seismic longitudinal displacements. Initially, the ropes
                                    were designed in SolidWorks using specifications from laboratory experiments and then
                                  real  stress–strain
                                    imported           values obtained
                                                into ABAQUS.              from properties
                                                                 The material   tensile testing,
                                                                                           of thewhile    plasticwere
                                                                                                  steel ropes     stress–strain values
                                                                                                                      defined based    on
                                  from
                                    real Table  3 were used
                                          stress–strain      forobtained
                                                        values   the simulations.  Superelastic
                                                                            from tensile testing,properties
                                                                                                  while plasticwere  assigned to values
                                                                                                                   stress–strain  SMA
                                  materials
                                    from Tableaccording   to Table
                                                 3 were used        3. simulations.
                                                               for the The FE modeling     employed
                                                                                     Superelastic        a hexagonal
                                                                                                   properties          element to
                                                                                                                 were assigned   shape
                                                                                                                                    SMA
                                  with   a constant
                                    materials        meshto
                                               according   size of 23.mm,
                                                             Table     The following  Biggs
                                                                            FE modeling      [25] as aa reference
                                                                                         employed       hexagonal(see   Figure
                                                                                                                    element     9). Fig-
                                                                                                                             shape   with
                                  ure  9 illustrates the schematic   of the  rope and the loading  setup.
                                    a constant mesh size of 2 mm, following Biggs [25] as a reference (see Figure 9). Figure 9
                                    illustrates the schematic of the rope and the loading setup.
                                  Table 3. Plastic stress–strain values.
                                   Table 3. Plastic stress–strain values.
                                                       Yield Stress                                               Plastic Strain
                                                          198.00
                                                         Yield Stress                                                  0.000Strain
                                                                                                                     Plastic
                                                          203.94
                                                            198.00                                                       0.018
                                                                                                                           0.000
                                                          220.38
                                                            203.94                                                       0.030
                                                                                                                           0.018
                                                          240.76
                                                            220.38                                                       0.046
                                                                                                                           0.030
                                                          261.40
                                                            240.76                                                       0.073
                                                                                                                           0.046
                                                            261.40                                                         0.073
                                                          270.44                                                         0.093
                                                            270.44                                                         0.093
                                                          276.43
                                                            276.43                                                       0.111
                                                                                                                           0.111
                                                          281.01
                                                            281.01                                                       0.130
                                                                                                                           0.130
                                                          285.22
                                                            285.22                                                       0.156
                                                                                                                           0.156
                                                            289.42                                                         0.234
                                                          289.42                                                         0.234




                            (a)                                  (b)                                               (c)
                                  Figure
                                   Figure9.9.
                                            Details of of
                                              Details  thethe
                                                           FEFE
                                                              model. (a) (a)
                                                                model.   FE meshing  scheme;
                                                                             FE meshing      (b) the
                                                                                        scheme;   (b) schematic of the
                                                                                                      the schematic  ofloading setup;
                                                                                                                        the loading   (c)
                                                                                                                                    setup;
                                  deﬁned reference point (RP) at one end.
                                   (c) defined reference point (RP) at one end.

                                        The
                                          Theropes
                                                 ropeswere
                                                        were  modeled
                                                                modeled   using
                                                                             usingC3D8R
                                                                                     C3D8R   solid    elements,
                                                                                                  solid   elements,which
                                                                                                                       whichare are
                                                                                                                                 eight-node
                                                                                                                                      eight-node hexahe-
                                                                                                                                                      hexa-
                                  dral
                                    hedral elements with hourglass control. The “Surface-to-Surface” contact algorithmwas
                                        elements      with    hourglass    control.    The    “Surface-to-Surface”          contact    algorithm       was
                                  used
                                    usedtotosimulate
                                              simulatethe theactual
                                                               actualcontact
                                                                        contactbetween
                                                                                  betweenthe   thewires
                                                                                                     wiresininthe
                                                                                                                thewire
                                                                                                                     wirerope.
                                                                                                                           rope.The
                                                                                                                                  Thepenalty
                                                                                                                                        penaltyfriction
                                                                                                                                                   friction
                                  algorithm
                                    algorithmwas   wasapplied
                                                        applied  to model
                                                                    to model the the
                                                                                  tangential
                                                                                       tangential frictional   behavior
                                                                                                        frictional         between
                                                                                                                     behavior          the lateral
                                                                                                                                  between            sur-
                                                                                                                                               the lateral
                                  faces  of the
                                    surfaces   of individual
                                                   the individual wires,   andand
                                                                       wires,    the the
                                                                                      friction
                                                                                           frictioncoeﬃcient
                                                                                                       coefficientwas   setset
                                                                                                                      was    to to
                                                                                                                                 bebe0.5.
                                                                                                                                       0.5.The
                                                                                                                                             Thenormal
                                                                                                                                                   normal
                                  behavior
                                    behaviorbetween
                                                 betweenthe  thewires
                                                                  wireswaswasdeﬁned
                                                                               definedasasa ahard hardcontact
                                                                                                          contact[25,28].
                                                                                                                    [25,28].AsAsshown
                                                                                                                                  shown   inin
                                                                                                                                             Figure
                                                                                                                                                Figure9c,9c,
                                  reference
                                    reference points RP1 and RP2 were defined at the center of each end surface of therope
                                               points   RP1    and  RP2    were   deﬁned       at  the  center   of  each  end   surface    of  the   rope
                                  core.
                                    core.The
                                           Thecorresponding
                                                  correspondingnodes  nodesononeacheachendendsurface
                                                                                                  surfaceofofthethewire
                                                                                                                     wirerope
                                                                                                                            ropewere
                                                                                                                                   werecoupled
                                                                                                                                          coupledwith with
                                  RP1
                                    RP1and
                                         andRP2.RP2.AllAllthe
                                                            thedegrees
                                                                 degreesofoffreedom
                                                                               freedomofofRP2   RP2werewereconstrained,
                                                                                                               constrained,whilewhilereference
                                                                                                                                        referencepoint
                                                                                                                                                     point
                                  1 1was
                                      wasallowed
                                           allowedtotomove movesolely
                                                                   solelyalong
                                                                           alongthetherope’s
                                                                                         rope’slongitudinal
                                                                                                    longitudinalaxis.axis.
                                        The
                                          Theloading
                                                loading process
                                                           process in inthe
                                                                          theFEFE   model
                                                                                model     waswas       simulated
                                                                                                 simulated      usingusing    the dynamic
                                                                                                                       the dynamic      explicitexplicit
                                                                                                                                                  method,
                                  method,    incorporating
                                    incorporating     two typestwo     types sinusoidal
                                                                   of loads:   of loads: sinusoidal
                                                                                             (0.01 Hz) and  (0.01  Hz) and
                                                                                                                seismic       seismic(Elexcitation
                                                                                                                          excitation                   (El
                                                                                                                                           Centro scaled
                                  Centro scaled earthquake) applied to reference point 1. The loading was displacement-
                                    earthquake)     applied   to reference   point  1.  The   loading    was   displacement-controlled,        with  8 mm
                                  controlled,
                                    displacements with for
                                                       8 mm thedisplacements
                                                                 SMA and 11 mm     for for
                                                                                        thethe
                                                                                             SMA      and
                                                                                                   steel    11 mm
                                                                                                          rope.      for the steel
                                                                                                                 Sinusoidal         rope. cyclic
                                                                                                                               loading’s    Sinusoidal
                                                                                                                                                    nature
                                  loading’s
                                    enables thecyclic  nature enables
                                                    simulation              the simulation
                                                                  of real vibrations              of real vibrations
                                                                                          and motions        induced by   and   motions induced
                                                                                                                             earthquakes,              by
                                                                                                                                              machinery,
                                  earthquakes,
                                    transportation, machinery,
                                                        and windtransportation,          and wind
                                                                       effects. The details        of theeﬀects.   The details
                                                                                                            considered             of theare
                                                                                                                           earthquake       considered
                                                                                                                                                presented
                                  earthquake
                                    in Table 4 andare Figure
                                                       presented     in Tablefrom
                                                                10, sourced     4 and  theFigure
                                                                                            Pacific10,    sourced from
                                                                                                       Earthquake           the Paciﬁc
                                                                                                                      Engineering          Earthquake
                                                                                                                                       Research     Center
                                  Engineering Research Center (PEER), as used in previous publications on structural and
                                  earthquake engineering dealing with the application of advanced materials for sustaina-
                                  ble resilience against earthquakes [29–32].
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                                               11 of 19

Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                 11 of 19
Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                 11 of 19
                                 (PEER), as used in previous publications on structural and earthquake engineering dealing with
                                 the application of advanced materials for sustainable resilience against earthquakes [29–32].
                                 Table 4. Details of the earthquake records used in this study.
                                 Table 4.
                                 Table 4. Details
                                          Details of
                                                  of the
                                                     the earthquake
                                                         earthquake records
                                                                    records used
                                                                            used in
                                                                                  in this
                                                                                     this study.
                                                                                          study.
                                   EQ Name         Magnitude (MW) Distance (km) PGD (cm)                       PGV (cm/s)         PGA (g)
                                   EQ   Name
                                   EQ Name         Magnitude  (M)W) Distance
                                                   Magnitude (M                (km) PGD
                                                                     Distance (km)        (cm)
                                                                                     PGD (cm)                  PGV  (cm/s)
                                                                                                               PGV (cm/s)         PGA   (g)
                                                                                                                                  PGA (g)
                                   El Centro             6.9 W            6.09         8.7                        30.9             0.281
                                   El
                                    El Centro
                                       Centro            6.9
                                                         6.9              6.09
                                                                          6.09         8.7
                                                                                       8.7                        30.9
                                                                                                                 30.9              0.281
                                                                                                                                   0.281




                                 Figure 10. Accelerogram of the El Centro earthquake.
                                 Figure 10.
                                 Figure 10. Accelerogram of the
                                            Accelerogram of the El
                                                                El Centro
                                                                   Centro earthquake.
                                                                          earthquake.
                                 2.3. Validation
                                 2.3. Validation of of Numerical
                                                       Numerical Steel
                                                                   Steel Rope
                                                                           Rope Models
                                                                                 Models
                                 2.3. Validation of Numerical Steel Rope Models
                                       The steel
                                       The  steel wire
                                                    wire used
                                                           used in
                                                                 in aa tensile
                                                                        tensile test
                                                                                 test was
                                                                                      was modeled
                                                                                            modeled using
                                                                                                       using the
                                                                                                              the ABAQUS
                                                                                                                  ABAQUS software,
                                                                                                                               software, with
                                                                                                                                          with
                                       The steel
                                 dimensions      of wire
                                                     210   usedlength
                                                          mm     in a tensile
                                                                         and  1 test was
                                                                                mm          modeled
                                                                                      diameter.   A    using thegeneral
                                                                                                    nonlinear     ABAQUS       software,
                                                                                                                          static analysiswith
                                                                                                                                           was
                                 dimensions of 210 mm length and 1 mm diameter. A nonlinear general static analysis
                                 dimensions
                                 employed      toofapply
                                                    210 mm    length
                                                           linear  axial and  1 mm to
                                                                            tension   diameter.
                                                                                         the wire.A The
                                                                                                    nonlinear   general
                                                                                                          tension         static analysis rela-
                                                                                                                   load–displacement      was
                                 was employed to apply linear axial tension to the wire. The tension load–displacement
                                 employed
                                 tionship oftothe  apply
                                                      wire linear
                                                            was    axial tension
                                                                  compared      with tothe
                                                                                         theFE
                                                                                             wire. Theintension   load–displacement      rela-
                                 relationship    of the  wire  was   compared      with   the FEmodel
                                                                                                  model inFigure
                                                                                                             Figure11.
                                                                                                                     11. The
                                                                                                                         The results  indicate
                                                                                                                              results indicate
                                 tionship
                                 that there of
                                       there is the   wire
                                              is aa strong  was   compared
                                                     strong correlation
                                                             correlation betweenwith   the
                                                                             between the    FE
                                                                                        the FE  model
                                                                                             FE and     in  Figure
                                                                                                 and experimental   11. The
                                                                                                      experimental outcomes. results
                                                                                                                      outcomes. The   indicate
                                                                                                                                   The minor
                                                                                                                                        minor
                                 that
                                 that there is a between
                                 discrepancies      strong correlation
                                                               the FE
                                                                   FE andandbetween     the FEresults
                                                                              experimental       and experimental
                                                                                                       are due
                                                                                                            due to    outcomes. The minor
                                 discrepancies     between the                experimental     results are      to unmodeled
                                                                                                                    unmodeled parameters,
                                                                                                                                  parameters,
                                 discrepancies
                                 such as           between
                                        as potential
                                           potential          the FEinand
                                                        disparities           experimental
                                                                          theboundary          results are
                                                                              boundaryconditions
                                                                                           conditions       duespecimen
                                                                                                        ofthe
                                                                                                           the  to unmodeled
                                                                                                                           andthe parameters,
                                                                                                                                the FEmodel.
                                                                                                                                       model.
                                 such                   disparities  in the                            of     specimen and         FE
                                 such as potential disparities in the boundary conditions of the specimen and the FE model.




                                 Figure 11.
                                 Figure  11.Comparison
                                            Comparisonbetween
                                                          betweenthe
                                                                   thenumerical
                                                                       numerical  analysis
                                                                                analysis    results
                                                                                         results    of tension
                                                                                                 of tension    load–displacement
                                                                                                            load–displacement and and
                                                                                                                                  the
                                 Figure
                                 the    11. Comparison
                                     experimental        between the numerical analysis results of tension load–displacement and
                                                  results.
                                 experimental results.
                                 the experimental results.
                                       Numerical modeling
                                       Numerical   modeling of ofsteel
                                                                   steelropes
                                                                          ropessubjected
                                                                                  subjectedtoto
                                                                                              sinusoidal  (0.01
                                                                                                 sinusoidal     Hz)Hz)
                                                                                                             (0.01   andand
                                                                                                                          seismic  ex-
                                                                                                                              seismic
                                       Numerical   modeling   of  steel ropes   subjected  to sinusoidal  (0.01 Hz)  and
                                 citation, particularly the El Centro scaled earthquake, was performed using the FE soft-
                                 excitation,  particularly  the El  Centro    scaled   earthquake,   was  performed       seismic
                                                                                                                       using   the ex-
                                                                                                                                   FE
                                 citation, particularly  the El Centro    scaled   earthquake,  was   performed
                                 ware ABAQUS in accordance with the previously outlined methodology. The
                                 software  ABAQUS      in accordance    with   the  previously  outlined          using
                                                                                                          methodology.   the
                                                                                                                          TheFE  soft-
                                                                                                                               stress–
                                 ware
                                 strainABAQUS
                                 strain            in accordance
                                        relationships
                                        relationships   derived from withthethe
                                                                        the       previously
                                                                             simulation
                                                                             simulation   were
                                                                                          wereoutlined  methodology.
                                                                                                 juxtaposed
                                                                                                juxtaposed    with the
                                                                                                             with        The stress–
                                                                                                                   the experimental
                                                                                                                       experimental
                                 strain relationships
                                 data, with
                                 data,  with the
                                             the resultsderived
                                                 results depictedfrom
                                                          depicted in   the
                                                                    in Figuresimulation
                                                                        Figure 12.
                                                                                 12.      were  juxtaposed   with  the experimental
                                 data, with the results depicted in Figure 12.
 Buildings2024,
Buildings        14,x1567
           2024,14,   FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                          1212ofof19
                                                                                                                                        19




                                                                     Stress (N/mm2)
          (a) Comparison of stress–strain curves of steel wire      (b) Comparison of stress–strain curves of 1 × 3 rope
           Stress (N/mm2)




                                                                     Stress (N/mm2)




          (c) Comparison of stress–strain curves of 1 × 7 rope   (d) Comparison of stress–strain curves of 1 × 7 bundle rope
                                                                        Stress (N/mm2)
          Stress (N/mm2)




         (e) Comparison of stress–strain curves of 1 × 19 rope      (f) Comparison of stress–strain curves of 1 × 27 rope
                                         Stress (N/mm2)




                                        (g) Comparison of stress–strain curves of 7 × 7 rope
                                 Figure
                                  Figure12.
                                         12.Comparison
                                              Comparisonof stress–strain curves
                                                            of stress–strain    between
                                                                             curves     the numerical
                                                                                    between           analysis
                                                                                             the numerical     resultsresults
                                                                                                            analysis   and theand
                                                                                                                               exper-
                                                                                                                                  the
                                 imental results.
                                  experimental results.

                                     The diagrams in Figure 12 demonstrate a strong correlation between the experi-
                                 mental and FE results. The slight discrepancy between the experimental and numerical
Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                      13 of 19
Buildings 2024,
Buildings       14, 1567
          2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                      1313of
                                                                                                                                                of 19
                                                                                                                                                   19



                                 results
                                       The can   be attributed
                                             diagrams             to inaccuracies
                                                           in Figure    12 demonstratein the   setup on
                                                                                             a strong      the shakebetween
                                                                                                        correlation     table and thethe  method of
                                                                                                                                      experimental
                                 results
                                 securing can thebecables
                                                    attributed
                                                             with tosteel
                                                                      inaccuracies
                                                                           fasteners. inItthe
                                                                                            is setup on
                                                                                               worth       the shake
                                                                                                        noting   that   table and
                                                                                                                       during    somethe laboratory
                                                                                                                                          method of
                                 and FE results. The slight discrepancy between the experimental and numerical results can
                                 securing
                                 tests, the the    cables were
                                               fasteners    with notsteelsuﬃciently
                                                                           fasteners. It   is worth leading
                                                                                        tightened,      noting that    during
                                                                                                                  to the
                                                                                                                      cable      some laboratory
                                                                                                                             slippage     within the
                                 be attributed     to inaccuracies      in the setup on    the shake table and            method     of securing  the
                                 tests, the fasteners
                                 fasteners.    The          wereinconsistency
                                                     observed      not suﬃciently   was tightened,
                                                                                           exacerbated leading
                                                                                                           by    to cable slippage
                                                                                                               increasing    the   numberwithin  the
                                                                                                                                             of bun-
                                 cables with steel fasteners. It is worth noting that during some laboratory tests, the fasteners
                                 fasteners.
                                 dles. not     The observed
                                        Consequently,        the inconsistency
                                                                  most signiﬁcant  was exacerbatedbetween  by increasing andthe    number    of bun-
                                 were        sufficiently tightened,       leading to discrepancy
                                                                                        cable slippage within the    FE fasteners.
                                                                                                                               test  data   occurred
                                                                                                                                      The observed
                                 dles.
                                 in     Consequently,
                                    the case of the          the  most    signiﬁcant    discrepancy      between     FE  and   test  data   occurred
                                 inconsistency       was7 exacerbated
                                                           × 7 right regular     lay (Figurethe
                                                                            by increasing        12g).   The stress–strain
                                                                                                    number     of bundles. curve        of the simu-
                                                                                                                               Consequently,      the
                                 in the
                                 lated   case
                                        steel   of  the
                                                ropes,   7 ×  7 right
                                                         depicted     inregular
                                                                         Figure  lay
                                                                                  13, (Figure
                                                                                      serves     12g).
                                                                                                as  a    The  stress–strain
                                                                                                      fundamental       basis
                                 most significant discrepancy between FE and test data occurred in the case of the 7 × 7 right curve
                                                                                                                              for      of  the
                                                                                                                                    comparing  simu-
                                                                                                                                                 dif-
                                 lated
                                 ferent
                                 regularsteel
                                            layropes,
                                          rope   (Figure depicted
                                                  arrangements.
                                                            12g). Thein  Figure
                                                                       The  curve13,  serves
                                                                                   indicates
                                                                         stress–strain    curve asthat
                                                                                                    a fundamental
                                                                                                   of        behaviorbasis
                                                                                                        thesimulated
                                                                                                      the                     for
                                                                                                                         of all
                                                                                                                         steel   thecomparing
                                                                                                                               ropes, various    dif-
                                                                                                                                                rope
                                                                                                                                         depicted  in
                                 ferent  rope
                                 arrangements     arrangements.
                                                     is almost        The
                                                                 similar,   curve
                                                                            with   indicates
                                                                                  any   slight   that   the
                                                                                                diﬀerences  behavior
                                                                                                               attributed
                                 Figure 13, serves as a fundamental basis for comparing different rope arrangements. The of all
                                                                                                                            to   the
                                                                                                                                the   various
                                                                                                                                     twisting   rope
                                                                                                                                               angle
                                 arrangements
                                 of the ropes.
                                 curve   indicates   is that
                                                        almostthesimilar,
                                                                  behavior  with
                                                                               of any  slight
                                                                                  all the       diﬀerences
                                                                                             various           attributed to the
                                                                                                       rope arrangements             twistingsimilar,
                                                                                                                                 is almost     angle
                                 of the  ropes.
                                 with any slight differences attributed to the twisting angle of the ropes.
                                         (N/mm
                                       Stress
                                  Stress          ) 2)
                                              (N/mm
                                                2




                                 Figure 13. Comparison of stress–strain curves of the numerical analysis results of steel ropes.
                                 Figure
                                 Figure 13.
                                        13. Comparison
                                            Comparison of
                                                       of stress–strain
                                                          stress–strain curves
                                                                        curves of
                                                                               of the
                                                                                  the numerical
                                                                                      numerical analysis
                                                                                                analysis results of steel
                                                                                                         results of steel ropes.
                                                                                                                          ropes.
                                 2.4. Validation of Numerical SMA Rope Models
                                 2.4. Validation
                                 2.4. Validation ofof Numerical SMA
                                                                 SMA Rope Models
                                                                              Models
                                       This sectionNumerical
                                                       is dedicated to Rope
                                                                        validating the modeling process for SMA cables. The val-
                                       This section
                                       This   sectionisisdedicated
                                                           dedicatedtotovalidating
                                                                         validating the      modeling   process
                                                                                                              for for  SMA    cables.  The
                                 idation   is accomplished     by employing thethe      FEmodeling
                                                                                            method toprocess
                                                                                                        analyze    SMA
                                                                                                                   cables cables. The val-
                                                                                                                           with diﬀerent
                                 validation
                                 idation       is accomplished
                                          is accomplished         by  employing
                                                               by 1employing        the   FE  method  to analyze    cables with   different
                                 cross-sectional    dimensions:     × 3, 1 × 27, the
                                                                                 and FE 7 × method   to analyze
                                                                                            7. Following  this, thecables  with
                                                                                                                     results     diﬀerent
                                                                                                                             obtained   are
                                 cross-sectional dimensions: 1 × 3, 1 × 27, and 7 × 7. Following this, the results obtained
                                 cross-sectional
                                 compared withdimensions:         1 × 3,data
                                                      both numerical     1 × 27,
                                                                              andand    7 × 7. Following
                                                                                     experimental         this, from
                                                                                                     ﬁndings    the results  obtained
                                                                                                                       previous         are
                                                                                                                                  research
                                 are compared with both numerical data and experimental findings from previous research
                                 compared      with both numerical data and experimental ﬁndings from previous research
                                 studies [14,24,25].
                                 studies [14,24,25].
                                 studies  [14,24,25].
                                       As depicted in Figure 14, the mechanical simulation of SMA cable responses using
                                       As depicted in Figure 14, the mechanical simulation of SMA cable responses using
                                 ABAQUSAs depicted      in Figure 14,
                                              FEA demonstrates        the mechanical
                                                                   a remarkable      levelsimulation   of with
                                                                                            of agreement  SMAthe  cable  responses
                                                                                                                     observed        using
                                                                                                                                responses
                                 ABAQUS FEA demonstrates a remarkable level of agreement with the observed responses
                                 ABAQUS
                                 reported     FEA demonstrates     a remarkable  al.level
                                                                                      [24].of agreement with the observed responses
                                 reported in in the work by
                                                the work    by Houshmand
                                                               Houshmand      et al.
                                                                              et      [24].
                                 reported in the work by Houshmand et al. [24].




                                 Figure
                                 Figure 14.
                                        14. Comparison
                                            Comparison of
                                                       of stress–strain
                                                          stress–strain numerical analysis results
                                                                        numerical analysis results for
                                                                                                   for steel
                                                                                                       steel ropes.
                                                                                                             ropes.
                                 Figure 14. Comparison of stress–strain numerical analysis results for steel ropes.
Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                        14 of 1

Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                       14 of 19


   Buildings 2024, 14, 1567              In Biggs’s study [25], SMA cables with varying helix angles of 10°, 17°,14and                   of 1921° wer
                                  investigated.
                                        In Biggs’sThis
                                                     studystudy
                                                             [25], conducts
                                                                    SMA cables  comprehensive
                                                                                    with varying simulations
                                                                                                    helix angles and  of 10°, derives    stress–strain
                                                                                                                                  17°, and    21° were
                                  relationships
                                 investigated.      from
                                                   This    these
                                                         study     simulations.
                                                                  conducts          Subsequently,
                                                                               comprehensive          the   results
                                                                                                   simulations      and are   compared
                                                                                                                             derives         to experi
                                                                                                                                        stress–strain
                                       In Biggs’s  studyBiggs’s
                                                          [25], SMA    cables [25],
                                                                               with with
                                                                                     varying                       ◦ , 17◦ , and 21◦ were
                                  mental    data from
                                 relationships     from   these    research
                                                                  simulations.             thehelix
                                                                                   Subsequently,
                                                                                                    angles of 10
                                                                                                comparative
                                                                                                     the         analysis
                                                                                                           results              presentedtoinexperi-
                                                                                                                      are compared              Figur
                                 investigated. This study conducts comprehensive simulations and derives                       stress–strain
                                  15.
                                 mentalThe  ﬁndings
                                           datafrom     demonstrate
                                                 fromthese
                                                        Biggs’s          a notable    alignment
                                                                  researchSubsequently,
                                                                              [25], with the       between     the  experimental         and   FE  sim
                                 relationships               simulations.                   thecomparative      analysis
                                                                                                results are compared           presented in Figure
                                                                                                                           to experimental
                                  ulation
                                 15.
                                 data The
                                       from outcomes.
                                            ﬁndings      Any minor
                                                       demonstrate
                                              Biggs’s research          adisparities
                                                                 [25], withnotable     betweenanalysis
                                                                                     alignment
                                                                             the comparative      the two
                                                                                                  between   can
                                                                                                              thebe
                                                                                                          presented    attributed
                                                                                                                   experimental
                                                                                                                         in Figure 15.toand
                                                                                                                                          factors
                                                                                                                                         The       such
                                                                                                                                               FE sim-
                                  as the speciﬁcation
                                 ulation
                                 findings  outcomes.
                                            demonstrate    of
                                                         Any  material    properties,
                                                               minor alignment
                                                            a notable   disparities     including
                                                                                      between
                                                                                    between      the
                                                                                               the  yielding
                                                                                                     two can and
                                                                                                   experimental  be and ultimate
                                                                                                                      attributed     stresses,
                                                                                                                                     to factorswithin
                                                                                                                             FE simulation        such
                                  the  ABAQUS       software.    In  the  context  of  the Biggs   model    [25],  as    depicted
                                 as the speciﬁcation of material properties, including yielding and ultimate stresses, within
                                 outcomes.     Any   minor   disparities   between    the two   can be  attributed     to  factors    in
                                                                                                                                    such Figure
                                                                                                                                            as    15, i
                                  becomes
                                 the
                                 the  ABAQUS  apparent
                                      specification       that In
                                                   software.    cable
                                                      of material   thebehavior     diverges
                                                                         contextincluding
                                                                    properties,    of the Biggswith  variations
                                                                                                   model
                                                                                             yielding  and[25],   asindepicted
                                                                                                             ultimate     the  twisting
                                                                                                                           stresses, in    angle.15,
                                                                                                                                         Figure
                                                                                                                                      within       Spe
                                                                                                                                                     it
                                  ciﬁcally,
                                 the  ABAQUS  increasing
                                                  software. the
                                                              Intwisting
                                                                  the contextangle  results
                                                                                of the  Biggsinmodel
                                                                                                 higher  levels
                                                                                                      [25],       of   strain
                                                                                                             as depicted
                                 becomes apparent that cable behavior diverges with variations in the twisting angle. Spe-     inin the
                                                                                                                                  Figure  cable,
                                                                                                                                           15, whil
                                 itsimultaneously      reducing    cable   stress
                                                                            angle levels.
                                     becomes apparent     that cable   behavior    diverges with variations in the twisting angle.
                                 ciﬁcally,   increasing    the twisting            results in higher levels of strain in the cable, while
                                 Specifically, increasing the twisting angle results in higher levels of strain in the cable, while
                                 simultaneously   reducing
                                 simultaneously reducing    cable
                                                         cable     stress
                                                               stress     levels.
                                                                      levels.




                                  Figure 15. Comparison between stress–strain curves obtained through numerical analysis and ex
                                  perimental data derived  from Biggs’ research   [25]. obtained through numerical analysis and
                                 Figure
                                 Figure 15. Comparison
                                        15. Comparison   betweenstress–strain
                                                        between   stress–strain  curves
                                                                               curves     obtained through numerical analysis and ex-
                                 perimental
                                 experimentaldata
                                              dataderived fromBiggs’
                                                  derived from Biggs’research
                                                                       research  [25].
                                                                              [25].
                                        As per the data provided by Reedlun [14], an analysis of the behavior of 7 × 7 and
                                  × 27As
                                       cables
                                       As  perwas
                                           per the    conducted
                                                 thedata
                                                      dataprovidedusing
                                                            provided    byABAQUS.
                                                                     by Reedlun
                                                                            Reedlun[14], The   results
                                                                                         an analysis
                                                                                       [14],            obtained
                                                                                                        of
                                                                                               an analysis    of thefrom
                                                                                                           the behavior    ABAQUS
                                                                                                                           of
                                                                                                                      behavior     of 7 were
                                                                                                                              7 × 7 and         then
                                                                                                                                          × 7 and  1
                                 1compared
                                   × 27 cablestowas the  ones  obtained
                                                       conducted           from
                                                                    using ABAQUS. Reedlun      [14],
                                                                                       The results    and   the
                                                                                                      obtained   comparison
                                                                                                                 from ABAQUS     is  illustrated
                                                                                                                                     were          in
                                 × 27 cables was conducted using ABAQUS. The results obtained from ABAQUS were then
                                 then  compared
                                  Figure   16. to  to the
                                               Minor      ones obtainedbetween
                                                        discrepancies     from Reedlun     [14],results
                                                                                     the two     and thecan
                                                                                                          comparison    is illustrated   in factors
                                 compared
                                 Figure 16. Minor  thediscrepancies
                                                        ones  obtained    fromthe
                                                                     between      Reedlun     [14],can
                                                                                    two results      and   thebe   ascribed
                                                                                                                comparison
                                                                                                       be ascribed
                                                                                                                              to various
                                                                                                                     to variousisfactors,
                                                                                                                                    illustrated   in
                                  including
                                 Figure   16.  insuﬃcient
                                              Minor           knowledge
                                                       discrepancies        of the the
                                                                        between      detailed
                                                                                         two     characteristics
                                                                                               results  can   be    of SMAtobehavior,
                                                                                                                  ascribed       various     such a
                                                                                                                                            factors
                                 including insufficient knowledge of the detailed characteristics of SMA behavior, such as
                                  initial andinsuﬃcient
                                 including      ultimate
                                 initial and ultimate
                                                           stresses, as welldisparities
                                                             knowledge
                                                        stresses, as well asof
                                                                               as
                                                                               thedisparities
                                                                                    detailed     in experimental
                                                                                                characteristics
                                                                                          in experimental          ofand
                                                                                                                      SMA
                                                                                                             and numerical
                                                                                                                           numerical
                                                                                                                              behavior,   behavior
                                                                                                                               behavior. such as
                                 initial and ultimate stresses, as well as disparities in experimental and numerical behavior.




                                  Figure16.
                                 Figure  16. Comparison
                                             Comparisonbetween
                                                           between  stress–strain
                                                                  stress–strain     curves
                                                                                 curves      obtained
                                                                                        obtained       through
                                                                                                   through     numerical
                                                                                                           numerical      analysis
                                                                                                                     analysis and and ex
                                  perimental data
                                 experimental      derivedfrom
                                              data derived  fromReedlunn’
                                                                 Reedlunn’    s research
                                                                           s research [14].[14].
                                 Figure 16. Comparison between stress–strain curves obtained through numerical analysis and ex-
                                 perimental data derived from Reedlunn’ s research [14].
Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                 15 of 19
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                                               15 of 19



                                 3.
                                 3. Discussions
                                    Discussions
                                 3.1.
                                 3.1. Behavior
                                      Behavior ofof SMA
                                                    SMA Ropes
                                                           Ropes under
                                                                  under Sinusoidal
                                                                         Sinusoidal Load
                                                                                      Load
                                       In Figure    17, the  response   of the  SMA
                                       In Figure 17, the response of the SMA under     under sinusoidal
                                                                                                sinusoidal loading
                                                                                                             loading with
                                                                                                                        with aa frequency
                                                                                                                                frequency of  of
                                 0.01  Hz is
                                 0.01 Hz   is shown
                                              shown as  asaaforce
                                                             forceversus
                                                                    versusdisplacement
                                                                            displacementcurve.curve.The
                                                                                                      Thefindings
                                                                                                           ﬁndingsindicate
                                                                                                                       indicate  a nearly
                                                                                                                              a nearly      lin-
                                                                                                                                         linear
                                 ear  relationship
                                 relationship         between
                                                 between         the tensile
                                                            the tensile  forceforce   of ropes
                                                                                of ropes          andnumber
                                                                                            and the    the number      of wires
                                                                                                                of wires          comprising
                                                                                                                           comprising    them,
                                 them, where
                                 where   the forcetheexerted
                                                       force exerted    by the
                                                                by the rope   is rope   is equivalent
                                                                                 equivalent              to the summation
                                                                                                to the summation                of theexerted
                                                                                                                       of the forces    forces
                                 exerted   by its individual
                                 by its individual     wires. Aswires.    As illustrated
                                                                   illustrated  in Figure in    Figure
                                                                                             17a,       17a,corresponding
                                                                                                  the force   the force corresponding
                                                                                                                                to maximum    to
                                 maximum       displacement     (8 mm)   is approximately       365 N  for one   SMA
                                 displacement (8 mm) is approximately 365 N for one SMA wire; this translates to about  wire; this  translates
                                 to about
                                 1.09, 2.40,1.09,
                                              6.01,2.40,
                                                    8.1, 6.01,
                                                         and 148.1, and
                                                                  kN,    14 kN, respectively
                                                                       respectively   for 1 × 3,for1 ×1 7,
                                                                                                        × 3,
                                                                                                           1×1 ×19,
                                                                                                                 7, 11 ×
                                                                                                                       × 19,
                                                                                                                         27,1and
                                                                                                                              × 27,7×and   7×7
                                                                                                                                       7 SMA
                                 SMA
                                 ropes.ropes.
                                         It can It
                                                 becan   be inferred
                                                     inferred  that thethat the tensile
                                                                         tensile           eﬃciency
                                                                                  efficiency           of the
                                                                                               of the rope     rope decreases
                                                                                                            decreases    with anwith    an in-
                                                                                                                                   increase   in
                                 crease  in theof
                                 the number      number
                                                    wires. of wires.




                              (a) SMA wire                                                  (b) 1 × 3 SMA rope




                           (c) 1 × 7 SMA rope                                           (d) 1 × 7 SMA bundle rope




                          (e) 1 × 19 SMA rope                                               (f) 1 × 27 SMA rope

                                 Figure 17. Cont.
Buildings 2024,
  Buildings     14,14,
            2024,   1567FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                      16 of 19
Buildings  2024, 14, x xFOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                     1616ofof1919




                                                               (g)7 7× ×7 7SMA
                                                             (g)            SMArope
                                                                                rope
                                   Figure17.
                                 Figure   17.Force–displacement
                                              Force–displacementcurves
                                                                  curvesofofSMA
                                                                             SMAropes
                                                                                 ropesunder
                                                                                       undersinusoidal
                                                                                              sinusoidalloading.
                                                                                                          loading.
                                 Figure 17. Force–displacement  curves of  SMA ropes  under sinusoidal loading.

                                       InInspite
                                       In    spiteof
                                           spite  ofofbeing
                                                       beingstretched
                                                      being    stretchedto
                                                              stretched     toaaadisplacement
                                                                           to     displacementofof
                                                                                  displacement     of8 88mm
                                                                                                          mm
                                                                                                          mm  beyond
                                                                                                             beyond
                                                                                                               beyond    the
                                                                                                                       the    loading
                                                                                                                            loading
                                                                                                                          the         plateau,
                                                                                                                                    plateau,
                                                                                                                               loading         all
                                                                                                                                              all
                                                                                                                                        plateau,
                                   the
                                 thethe
                                 all    deformation
                                      deformation
                                         deformation      observed
                                                        observed
                                                           observed   in  the
                                                                    ininthetheSMASMA
                                                                                 SMAroperope
                                                                                       ropewaswas   fully
                                                                                              wasfully      recovered
                                                                                                   fully recovered        upon   unloading.
                                                                                                                        upon unloading.
                                                                                                           recovered upon                    This
                                                                                                                                unloading. This
                                                                                                                                            This
                                   uniquebehavior
                                 unique
                                 unique      behaviorrenders
                                            behavior      rendersthe
                                                        renders     theSMA
                                                                  the     SMArope
                                                                        SMA       ropean
                                                                                 rope  anan a ractivematerial
                                                                                           attractive
                                                                                          attractive      materialfor
                                                                                                         material   forapplications
                                                                                                                   for    applicationsrequiring
                                                                                                                        applications    requiring
                                                                                                                                       requiring
                                   highstrength
                                 high
                                 high    strength
                                        strength     and
                                                   and
                                                   and     ﬂexibility
                                                          ﬂexibility
                                                         flexibility  inin
                                                                     in     acompact
                                                                              compact
                                                                         aacompact        form.
                                                                                        form.
                                                                                       form.

                                   3.2.Behavior
                                  3.2.
                                 3.2.    Behaviorof
                                       Behavior    ofofSMA
                                                        SMARopes
                                                       SMA      Ropesunder
                                                              Ropes    underthe
                                                                     under    theEl
                                                                            the  ElElCentro
                                                                                       CentroEarthquake
                                                                                     Centro   Earthquake
                                                                                             Earthquake
                                          The
                                        The
                                        The     hysteresis
                                               hysteresis
                                              hysteresis       loops
                                                             loops
                                                           loops      representing
                                                                    representing
                                                                  representing          theresponses
                                                                                   thethe   responses
                                                                                        responses  of SMA-wire,    1 × 31 rope,
                                                                                                       ofofSMA-wire,
                                                                                                             SMA-wire,    1× ×3 3rope,
                                                                                                                                  and    ×
                                                                                                                                  rope,1and
                                                                                                                                          and   1× ×7 7
                                                                                                                                             71rope
                                   rope
                                 under    under    the   El Centro    earthquake      scenario  scaled to  a  peak ground
                                  rope under the El Centro earthquake scenario scaled to a peak ground acceleration ofare
                                          the   El Centro    earthquake    scenario     scaled  to a peak   ground            acceleration
                                                                                                                    acceleration    of   0.6  gof  0.6
                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                                 illustrated
                                   g  are       in Figure
                                           illustrated    in 18.
                                                             Figure
                                  g are illustrated in Figure 18.     18.




                                                                  (a)SMA
                                                                (a)   SMAwire
                                                                          wire




                              (b)1 1× ×3 3SMA
                             (b)           SMArope
                                               rope                                           (c)(c)1 1× ×7 7SMA
                                                                                                              SMArope
                                                                                                                  rope
                                   Figure18.
                                 Figure   18.Force–displacement
                                              Force–displacementcurves
                                                                  curvesofofSMA
                                                                             SMAropes
                                                                                 ropesunder
                                                                                       underthe
                                                                                              theElElCentro
                                                                                                      Centroearthquake
                                                                                                             earthquakescenario.
                                                                                                                        scenario.
                                 Figure 18. Force–displacement  curves of  SMA ropes  under the El Centro earthquake  scenario.
                                          Uponcomparing
                                        Upon     comparingthe
                                                            theresponse
                                                                responseofofthe
                                                                              theSMA
                                                                                  SMAwire,
                                                                                        wire,asasdepicted
                                                                                                   depictedininFigure
                                                                                                                Figure18a,
                                                                                                                       18a,with
                                                                                                                            withthat
                                                                                                                                  that
                                   of  its steel wire counterpart, as illustrated in Figure  3, it can be  deduced   that the seismic
                                  of its steel wire counterpart, as illustrated in Figure 3, it can be deduced that the seismic
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                                                    17 of 19
Buildings 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                     17 of 19


                                        Upon comparing the response of the SMA wire, as depicted in Figure 18a, with that
                                  of its
                                 responsesteel
                                            ofwire  counterpart,
                                               the SMA           as illustrated
                                                        wire is comparable    toin Figure
                                                                                 that      3, steel
                                                                                      of the  it canwire
                                                                                                     be deduced   that the both
                                                                                                         in pure tension,  seismic
                                                                                                                                in
                                  response   of the SMA  wire is comparable
                                 terms of maximum force and displacement.      to that of the  steel wire in pure tension, both in
                                  terms of maximum force and displacement.
                                       Similarly, upon scrutinizing the responses of SMAs 1 × 3 and 1 × 7, as shown in Figure
                                        Similarly, upon scrutinizing the responses of SMAs 1 × 3 and 1 × 7, as shown in
                                 18b,c, with those in Figure 17b,c, it can be observed that the SMA 1 × 3 and 1 × 7 ropes
                                  Figure 18b,c, with those in Figure 17b,c, it can be observed that the SMA 1 × 3 and
                                 exhibit a seismic response that is similar to that under sinusoidal loading, in terms of max-
                                  1 × 7 ropes exhibit a seismic response that is similar to that under sinusoidal loading, in
                                 imum force. This observation underscores the potential of SMA ropes as a promising ma-
                                  terms of maximum force. This observation underscores the potential of SMA ropes as a
                                 terial for applications that require high strength and resilience under seismic loads. For
                                  promising material for applications that require high strength and resilience under seismic
                                 example, the maximum force is about 1.1 and 1.09 kN under sinusoidal and earthquake
                                  loads. For example, the maximum force is about 1.1 and 1.09 kN under sinusoidal and
                                 loading, respectively.
                                  earthquake loading, respectively.
                                 3.3.
                                  3.3.Study
                                       Studyon onSMA
                                                   SMARope
                                                         RopeBehavior
                                                                BehaviorSensitivity
                                                                           SensitivitytotoCable
                                                                                           CableArrangement
                                                                                                    Arrangement
                                       The   stress–strain    behavior     of SMA     ropes
                                        The stress–strain behavior of SMA ropes under the     under    the
                                                                                                         ElEl  Centro
                                                                                                            Centro       earthquake
                                                                                                                     earthquake          scenario
                                                                                                                                     scenario   has
                                 has  been   investigated    using    the FE  method.     In  this  regard, Figure    19
                                  been investigated using the FE method. In this regard, Figure 19 presents a comparison  presents    a compari-
                                 son  of the
                                  of the      stress–strain
                                          stress–strain       responses
                                                          responses         of various
                                                                         of various   SMA SMA roperope  conﬁgurations,
                                                                                                     configurations,       including
                                                                                                                        including        wire,
                                                                                                                                      wire,  1× 1 ×3,
                                 3, 1 × 7, 1  × 7 bundle,   1 ×  19, 1  × 27, and   7 × 7 ropes    with  helix  angles  of  0,
                                  1 × 7, 1 × 7 bundle, 1 × 19, 1 × 27, and 7 × 7 ropes with helix angles of 0, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 3, 5, 7, 9, and  13
                                 degrees,   respectively.
                                  13 degrees,                It isItnoteworthy
                                                 respectively.       is noteworthy thatthat
                                                                                         all investigated    ropes
                                                                                               all investigated      exhibit
                                                                                                                   ropes       superelastic
                                                                                                                           exhibit             be-
                                                                                                                                     superelastic
                                 havior;
                                  behavior;however,
                                               however, their  mechanical
                                                           their  mechanical   responses
                                                                                  responses  vary
                                                                                                varyslightly.
                                                                                                      slightly.For
                                                                                                                 Forinstance,
                                                                                                                     instance,the the77 ××77rope
                                                                                                                                              rope
                                 demonstrates
                                  demonstratesaasmaller
                                                      smallerloading
                                                                loadingplateau
                                                                           plateaustress
                                                                                     stressand
                                                                                             andaalarger
                                                                                                     largerplateau
                                                                                                            plateaustrain
                                                                                                                       straincompared
                                                                                                                               comparedto    tothe
                                                                                                                                                the
                                 other  ropes.   This  observation     suggests    that increasing     the helix  angle  of
                                  other ropes. This observation suggests that increasing the helix angle of the ropes leads  the  ropes   leads  to
                                 atodecrease    in stress  and   an  increase    in strain.  Nonetheless,     in  general,
                                     a decrease in stress and an increase in strain. Nonetheless, in general, their mechanicaltheir  mechanical
                                 behavior
                                  behaviorisissimilar
                                                 similartotothat
                                                             thatof ofaasingle
                                                                         singlewire.
                                                                                 wire.
                                  Stress (N/mm2)




                                 Figure
                                  Figure19.
                                         19.Stress–strain
                                             Stress–straincomparisons
                                                           comparisonsof
                                                                       ofSMA
                                                                          SMAropes.
                                                                              ropes.

                                 4.4.Conclusions
                                     Conclusions
                                        Inthis
                                       In  thisstudy,
                                                study, the
                                                        the mechanical
                                                            mechanical behaviors
                                                                        behaviors of
                                                                                   of helically
                                                                                      helically symmetric
                                                                                                symmetric laboratory-fabricated
                                                                                                            laboratory-fabricated
                                  SMA    and  steel  wire ropes when   subjected to earthquake   excitation
                                 SMA and steel wire ropes when subjected to earthquake excitation and       and   quasi-static
                                                                                                                quasi-static   sinu-
                                                                                                                             sinus-
                                  soidal  loading   protocols are explored. Both experimental   and  numerical   methodologies
                                 oidal loading protocols are explored. Both experimental and numerical methodologies are         are
                                  employedto
                                 employed      toinvestigate
                                                  investigatetheir
                                                              theirresponses.
                                                                    responses.The
                                                                               Theconclusions
                                                                                    conclusionsdrawn
                                                                                                  drawnare
                                                                                                         arelisted
                                                                                                             listedas
                                                                                                                    asfollows:
                                                                                                                       follows:

                                 ••                 Theﬁndings
                                                   The   findings indicated
                                                                   indicated aa good
                                                                                good agreement
                                                                                     agreement between
                                                                                                  between numerical
                                                                                                             numerical calculations
                                                                                                                        calculations and
                                                                                                                                     and labora-
                                                                                                                                         labor-
                                                    tory outcomes for SMA ropes, suggesting FE simulation as a reliable tool for prelimi-
                                                   atory outcomes for SMA ropes, suggesting FE simulation as a reliable tool for pre-
                                                    nary assessments. Consequently, it is anticipated that the seismic response of SMA
                                                   liminary assessments. Consequently, it is anticipated that the seismic response of
                                                    wires, akin to their steel counterparts, is somewhat influenced by wire configurations
                                                   SMA wires, akin to their steel counterparts, is somewhat inﬂuenced by wire conﬁg-
                                                    but largely retains the superelastic attributes akin to a single wire.
                                                   urations but largely retains the superelastic attributes akin to a single wire.
                                  •                 The maximal stress and force observed in steel wires under both sinusoidal and
                                 •                 The maximal stress and force observed in steel wires under both sinusoidal and pure
                                                    pure tension loading are similar. Additionally, under quasi-static sinusoidal loading
                                                   tension loading are similar. Additionally, under quasi-static sinusoidal loading con-
                                                    conditions, the maximal force experienced by various rope configurations (1 × 3, 1 × 7,
                                                   ditions, the maximal force experienced by various rope conﬁgurations (1 × 3, 1 × 7, 1
                                                   × 7 Bundle, 1 × 19, 1 × 27, and 7 × 7) is 3, 7, 7, 19, 27, and 49 times greater than that of
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                                          18 of 19



                                       1 × 7 Bundle, 1 × 19, 1 × 27, and 7 × 7) is 3, 7, 7, 19, 27, and 49 times greater than
                                       that of a single wire, respectively. This discrepancy can be attributed to the effective
                                       distribution of force over the cross-sectional area of the ropes.
                                  •    The numerical simulation method utilized in this study shows promise for predicting
                                       the mechanical characteristics of helically symmetric SMA and steel wire ropes. Further-
                                       more, the mechanical responses of different steel rope arrangements under quasi-static
                                       sinusoidal loading are similar, with minor variations due to twisting angles.
                                  •    There’s a near-linear relationship between SMA rope tensile force and the number of
                                       wires, with full deformation recovery even after stretching beyond the loading plateau.
                                  •    The SMA 1 × 3 and 1 × 7 ropes exhibit seismic responses akin to those observed
                                       under sinusoidal loading conditions, particularly concerning maximum force. This
                                       observation underscores the potential of SMA ropes as a promising material for
                                       applications demanding high strength and resilience under seismic loading.
                                  •    Under the El Centro earthquake scenario, increasing the helix angle in SMA ropes
                                       reduces stress and increases strain, while their overall behavior resembles that of a
                                       single wire. However, further investigations under diverse seismic excitations are
                                       recommended to enhance our understanding of their performance.
                                       This study of the mechanical behavior of helically symmetric SMA and steel wire
                                  ropes under earthquake and quasi-static sinusoidal loading has yielded valuable insights,
                                  but several opportunities for further research remain to expand the scope and depth of
                                  the investigation. Exploring a broader range of rope configurations, conducting dynamic
                                  testing with realistic seismic excitations, investigating the influence of design parameters
                                  and evaluating durability, and comparing the performance of steel wire and SMA ropes
                                  under the same seismic conditions as well as assessing their feasibility and performance
                                  in real-world structures could provide a more comprehensive understanding of the ropes’
                                  behavior and their potential applications in seismic-resistant structures.

                                  Author Contributions: Methodology, P.N., N.F., S.M., M.M., A.S.W., M.C., A.B.A. and F.K.; Software,
                                  P.N., N.F., S.M., M.M., A.S.W., M.C., A.B.A. and F.K.; Validation, P.N., N.F., S.M., M.M., A.S.W., M.C.,
                                  A.B.A. and F.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                  Data Availability Statement: Data available upon request to the corresponding authors.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Feyrer, K. Wire Ropes; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2007.
2.    Narjabadifam, P.; Noori, M.; Cardone, D.; Eradat, R.; Kiani, M. Shape memory alloy (SMA)-based Superelasticity-assisted Slider
      (SSS): An engineering solution for practical aseismic isolation with advanced materials. Smart Struct. Syst. 2020, 26, 89–102.
3.    Hosseinzadeh, Y.; Barghian, M.; Emtena, M.; Khalese Dehghan, M. Experimental and theoretical investigation of steel moment
      frames retrofitting in using cable bracing. Sharif J. Civ. Eng. 2014, 30, 117–125.
4.    Shiravand, M.R.; Parvanehro, P.; Bagheri, S. Seismic response of cable stayed bridges under multi support excitation. J. Struct.
      Constr. Eng. 2017, 4, 58–69.
5.    Dolce, M.; Cardone, D.; Marnetto, R. SMA recentering devices for seismic isolation of civil structures. In Smart Structures and
      Materials 2001: Smart Systems for Bridges, Structures, and Highways; SPIE: Bellingham, WA, USA, 2001.
6.    Han, Y.L.; Li, Q.; Li, A.Q.; Leung, A.; Lin, P.H. Structural vibration control by shape memory alloy damper. Earthq. Eng. Struct.
      Dyn. 2003, 32, 483–494. [CrossRef]
7.    Corbi, O. Shape memory alloys and their application in structural oscillations attenuation. Simul. Model. Pract. Theory 2003, 11,
      387–402. [CrossRef]
8.    McCormick, J.; DesRoches, R.; Fugazza, D.; Auricchio, F. Seismic vibration control using superelastic shape memory alloys. J. Eng.
      Mater. Technol. 2006, 128, 294–301. [CrossRef]
9.    Parulekar, Y.; Reddy, G.; Vaze, K.; Guha, S.; Gupta, C.; Muthumani, K.; Sreekala, R. Seismic response attenuation of structures
      using shape memory alloy dampers. Struct. Control. Health Monit. 2012, 19, 102–119. [CrossRef]
10.   Hu, S.; Alam, M.S.; Zhang, Y.; Ding, Z.; He, X. Partially self-centering braces with NiTi- and Fe-SMA U-shaped dampers.
      Thin-Walled Struct. 2024, 197, 111605. [CrossRef]
Buildings 2024, 14, 1567                                                                                                            19 of 19



11.   Hu, S.; Koetaka, Y.; Chen, Z.-P.; Zhu, S.; Alam, M.S. Hybrid self-centering braces with NiTi-SMA U-shaped and frequency-
      dependent viscoelastic dampers for structural and nonstructural damage control. Eng. Struct. 2024, 308, 117920. [CrossRef]
12.   Hu, S.; Zhu, S. Life-cycle benefits estimation for hybrid seismic-resistant self-centering braced frames. Earthq. Eng. Struct. Dyn.
      2023, 52, 3097–3119. [CrossRef]
13.   Narjabadifam, P.; Noori, M.; Taciroglu, E.; Zhang, J.; Khoshnevis, B.; Cardone, D.; Basu, D.; Wang, T.; Elghandour, E.; Noroozine-
      jad Farsangi, E.; et al. Stirnimann, Sustainable earthquake resilience with the versatile shape memory alloy (SMA)-based
      superelasticity-assisted slider. Sensors 2022, 22, 6876. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Reedlunn, B.; Daly, S.; Shaw, J. Superelastic shape memory alloy cables: Part I–isothermal tension experiments. Int. J. Solids Struct.
      2013, 50, 3009–3026. [CrossRef]
15.   Beltran, J.; Cruz, C.; Herrera, R.; Moroni, O. Shape memory alloy CuAlBe strands subjected to cyclic axial loads. Eng. Struct. 2011,
      33, 2910–2918. [CrossRef]
16.   Carboni, B.; Lacarbonara, W.; Auricchio, F. Hysteresis of multiconfiguration assemblies of nitinol and steel strands: Experiments
      and phenomenological identification. J. Eng. Mech. 2015, 141, 04014135. [CrossRef]
17.   Ozbulut, O.E.; Daghash, S.; Sherif, M.M. Shape memory alloy cables for structural applications. J. Mater. Civ. Eng. 2016, 28,
      04015176. [CrossRef]
18.   Sherif, M.M.; Ozbulut, O.E. Tensile and superelastic fatigue characterization of NiTi shape memory cables. Smart Mater. Struct.
      2017, 27, 015007. [CrossRef]
19.   Sherif, M.M.; Ozbulut, O.E. Thermomechanical and electrical response of a superelastic NiTi shape memory alloy cable. J. Intell.
      Mater. Syst. Struct. 2020, 31, 2229–2242. [CrossRef]
20.   Fang, C.; Zheng, Y.; Chen, J.; Yam, M.C.; Wang, W. Superelastic NiTi SMA cables: Thermal-mechanical behavior, hysteretic
      modelling and seismic application. Eng. Struct. 2019, 183, 533–549. [CrossRef]
21.   Shi, Y.; Qian, H.; Kang, L.; Li, Z.; Xia, L. Cyclic behavior of superelastic SMA cable and its application in an innovative
      self-centering BRB. Smart Mater. Struct. 2021, 30, 095019. [CrossRef]
22.   Rajoriya, S.; Mishra, S.S. Analytical assessment of stay cable vibration mitigation using shape memory alloy wire. Eng. Res.
      Express 2023, 5, 025008. [CrossRef]
23.   ABAQUS Analysis User’s Manual; Version 2020; Dassault Systems Simulation Corp.: Providence, RI, USA, 2020.
24.   Mohammad, H.; Rafezy, B.; Khalili, E.J. Evaluating the seismic performance of steel-SMA hybrid bracing structures. J. Civ.
      Environ. Eng. 2015, 12, 21–30.
25.   Biggs, D.B. Thermo-Mechanical Behavior and Shakedown of Shape Memory Alloy Cable Structures; University of Michigan: Ann Arbor,
      MI, USA, 2017.
26.   ASTM Standard A 931–96; Standard Test Method for Tension Testing of Wire Ropes and Strand. In Annual Book of ASTM
      Standards: Iron and Steel Products. American Society for Testing & Materials: West Conshohocken, PA, USA, 2002; pp. 489–493.
27.   SANTAM Engineering Design Company. Available online: https://www.santamco.com/Products/ShowProduct.aspx?l=1033
      &tmid=25&cid=10234&pid=30632 (accessed on 17 May 2024).
28.   Vahidi, S.; Arghavani, J.; Choi, E.; Ostadrahimi, A. Mechanical response of single and double-helix SMA wire ropes. Mech. Adv.
      Mater. Struct. 2022, 29, 5393–5406. [CrossRef]
29.   Narjabadifam, P.; Tiong, P.L.Y.; Mousavi-Alanjagh, R. Effects of inherent structural characteristics on seismic performances of
      aseismically base-isolated buildings. Iran J. Sci. Technol. Trans. Civ. Eng. 2020, 44, 1385–1401. [CrossRef]
30.   Cardone, D.; Narjabadifam, P.; Nigro, D. Shaking table tests of the Smart Restorable Sliding Base Isolation System (SRSBIS).
      J. Earthq. Eng. 2011, 15, 1157–1177. [CrossRef]
31.   Narjabadifam, P.; Hejazirad, F. Practical earthquake protection of multi-story buildings using shape memory alloy (SMA) braces.
      Int. J. Sci. Res. Civ. Eng. 2018, 2, 1–11.
32.   Noori, M.; Zhang, J.; Elghandour, E.; Cardone, D.; Narjabadifam, P. Versatile Aseismic Isolation Based on Practical Applications
      of Advanced Materials for Sustainable Resilience Against Earthquakes. In Seismic Isolation, Energy Dissipation and Active Vibration
      Control of Structures, WCSI 2022, Lecture Notes in Civil Engineering; Cimellaro, G.P., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; Volume
      309, pp. 611–622.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
