=== PAGE 1 ===
536
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, APRIL 2013
A Biologically Inspired Wet Shape Memory Alloy
Actuated Robotic Pump
Matthew D. Pierce and Stephen A. Mascaro, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents the concept, design, optimiza-
tion, and experimental analysis of a biologically inspired wet shape
memory alloy (SMA) actuated pump for robotic and mechatronic
systems. Just as the human heart provides energy to the muscles in
the body, the robotic SMA pump distributes thermoﬂuidic energy
to arrays of SMA actuators that function as robotic muscles. Fur-
thermore, the robotic pump draws from its own ﬂuidic output to
assist in the actuation of its own internal SMA actuators, just as a
portion of the blood pumped by the human heart supplies energy
to its own muscles. A feasibility analysis provides insight to lim-
its of conﬁguration parameters. Through dynamic modeling and
simulation of the system, various conﬁgurations can be analyzed
for optimization of the output. The effects of changing conﬁgura-
tion parameters were explored via simulation and validated with
experimentation. The current prototype of the SMA heart is capa-
ble of pumping 2.1 times more ﬂuid than is required to sustain its
own actuation. This is the ﬁrst successful implementation of such a
robotic pump, such that it has a net positive thermoﬂuidic output
to provide to other actuators while sustaining its own actuation via
thermoﬂuidic feedback. Furthermore, this SMA pump is capable
of pumping a net output of 66 mL/min, which is two orders of
magnitude larger than the output of any other SMA pump.
Index Terms—Actuators, mechanical energy, pumps, shape
memory alloys (SMAs).
I. INTRODUCTION
A
S ROBOTIC and mechatronic systems become increas-
ingly inspired by biological systems, the need for bioin-
spired actuation technologies increases. Common methods of
actuation include the use of electrical motors, pneumatics, and
hydraulics. The use of smart materials such as electroactive
polymers and shape memory alloys (SMAs) are becoming in-
creasingly popular in robotics due to their resemblance to muscle
[1] and their biocompatibility [2]. These properties make them
good candidates for hand and facial prosthetics research [3], [4].
In addition to their biocompatibility, there are also many other
advantages to using SMA actuators for nonbiological mecha-
nisms including thermostats [5], adaptive wings [6], and even
humanoid robots [7], [8].
SMAs are actuated by a temperature-induced phase transfor-
mation and are traditionally employed in wire form. As heat is
Manuscript received November 1, 2011; revised March 17, 2012; accepted
July 8, 2012. Date of publication August 20, 2012; date of current version
January 10, 2013. Recommended by Technical Editor A. Menciassi. This work
was supported by the National Science Foundation under Award 1031848.
M. D. Pierce is with L-3 Communications, New York, NY 10016 USA
(e-mail: m.pierce@utah.edu).
S. A. Mascaro is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 USA (e-mail: smascaro@mech.utah.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TMECH.2012.2211032
Fig. 1.
Wet SMA actuator concept.
applied, a nonlinear phase transformation occurs and the SMA
wire begins to contract. By cooling the SMA and applying an
opposing force, the material relaxes to its original state. It is
this muscle-like actuation that makes SMAs desirable for the
development of biologically inspired robots.
SMAs are commonly used for applications that do not require
high reciprocation rates due to their limited bandwidth. This is
due to the difﬁculty of heating and cooling the SMA quickly and
efﬁciently. For this reason, the wet SMA actuator was developed
to allow for more efﬁcient actuation and increased rates using
forced convection by using both thermoﬂuidic and electrical
heating [9]. Fig. 1 shows a diagram of the wet SMA actuator
concept. A wet SMA actuator consists of SMA wire enveloped in
ﬂuid that is contained within a compliant tube. This compliance
allows for the actuator to expand and contract with minimal
spring resistance. The ﬂuid inlet of the actuator is connected to
a terminal that is supplied with hot or cold ﬂuids and the outlet
is connected to a terminal that dumps the used ﬂuid into a lower
pressure reservoir. Entire wet SMA actuator arrays have been
developed to control hand and ﬁnger movement [10] and could
be used to control other high degree-of-freedom mechanisms as
well.
As more biologically inspired mechanisms are developed us-
ing wet SMA, it is necessary to develop ways of making these
robots self-sustaining (i.e., untethered). One step toward en-
abling these wet SMA robots is the development of an onboard
pump that can provide heating and cooling to sustain the actu-
ation of external subsystems using wet SMA technology. Just
as the wet SMA actuators behave like muscles with a cardio-
vascular system, a pump using wet SMA actuators would be
analogous to a heart.
One unique attribute of the heart is that it is able to pump
blood and provide energy to the muscles of the heart itself,
forming a self-sustaining pumping system. In the same way,
the SMA pump would need to be able to provide energy to
sustain self-actuation in addition to that of external wet SMA
systems as shown in Fig. 2 where the arrows represent the
ﬂow of energy from the pump to other subsystems. One such
1083-4435/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
PIERCE AND MASCARO: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED WET SHAPE MEMORY ALLOY ACTUATED ROBOTIC PUMP
537
Fig. 2.
Diagram demonstrating a pump that provides energy to external sys-
tems and itself, forming a self-sustaining pump analogous to a heart.
device has previously been designed and implemented by Ertel
and Mascaro [11], [12], but the output performance was not
sufﬁcient to sustain the actuation of its own wet SMA actuators.
In order for such a device to be viable for external subsystems,
the amount of ﬂuid output of the pump must be greater than
the amount of ﬂuid input required to cause actuation for the
pumping action. This corresponds to having an output-to-input
ratio greater than 1.0.
While this is the ﬁrst SMA device to use its own thermoﬂuidic
output to help sustain self-actuation, it is not the ﬁrst SMA pump.
Multiple microscale SMA pumps have been developed for de-
livering small amounts of ﬂuid for various MEMS-based chem-
ical delivery systems. One thin-ﬁlm SMA diaphragm pump is
capable of providing 50 μL/min [13]. Another novel recipro-
cating peristaltic pump prototype is capable of outputs up to
1000 μL/min of ﬂuid using SMA springs [14]. These electrically
heated and passively cooled SMA pumps are feasible on the mi-
croscale because the time constants with unforced convection
are much faster at the microscale. Since the robotic pump must
be able to actuate external wet SMA systems on a macroscale,
high net volume outputs on the order of mL/min are necessary.
To make these SMA pumps feasible at the macroscale, we can
take advantage of the forced-convection principles employed
in previous work [9], as well as novel bioinspiration from the
human heart.
This paper presents the design, theoretical analysis, and
implementation of a biologically inspired wet SMA actuated
robotic pump that can distribute thermal energy via forced ﬂuid
convection to external wet SMA subsystems on a macroscale
over prolonged periods of time. The SMA pump uniquely draws
from its own thermoﬂuidic output to assist in actuating its own
internal SMA actuators. Simulations and experiments are used
to characterize the performance of the pump, and to demonstrate
that it can operate in a self-sustaining cycle with a net positive
output that is orders of magnitude larger than other SMA pumps.
Portions of this work have been previously published in [15]
and [16]. This paper expands upon these and incorporates
the feasibility analysis from [12] to provide a comprehensive
analysis and comparison of the theoretical and experimental
performance.
II. SMA PUMP CONCEPTUAL DESIGN
There are many features that comprise the entire robotic pump
system. As with all pumps, there needs to be a mechanism that
causes ﬂuid volume displacement from one location to another.
Fig. 3.
Conceptual design schematic of the wet SMA robotic pump using
thermoﬂuidic feedback for self-actuation.
The type chosen was a reciprocating positive displacement di-
aphragm pump, the same type as a heart. A schematic of the
entire system is shown in Fig. 3.
Since the SMA pump has to be able to provide both hot and
cold ﬂuids to other subsystems, there are two separate pumping
systems. Each pump system is comprised of an accumulator, a
reservoir, a pumping chamber, and a wet SMA actuator. The
accumulators provide the pressure necessary to force the ﬂuids
through the tubing and across the SMA actuators attached to a
lever, which is attached to the pumping chambers. The reservoirs
hold the ﬂuids after they have passed through the actuators. The
pumping chambers draw the ﬂuid from the reservoirs and pump
it back to the accumulators with the aid of check valves to
ensure unidirectional ﬂow. A set of timed valves control the
routing manifold to send alternating hot and cold ﬂuid to the
actuators. After the hot and cold ﬂuids are passed through the
actuators, a similar manifold is used to separate the exiting
hot and cold ﬂuids into their respective reservoirs. The timing
of the valves could be replaced with a mechanically parasitic
valve mechanism, much like the cam-valve mechanism in an
automobile engine.
In this conceptual arrangement, the pumping chambers share
a common lever that allows the SMA actuators to use mechan-
ical advantage to increase displacement at the expense of force
and vice versa. This allows for variation in accumulator pressure
while still being able to cause some displacement in the pump-
ing chambers. This arrangement also requires that the hot and
cold chambers pump 180◦out of phase to avoid any unwanted
additional tension on the SMA actuators.
A primary requirement for this robotic pump is that it must
be able to pump ﬂuids over an extended period of time without
adding additional ﬂuid. In order to accomplish this, heat must
be added to the hot ﬂuid while simultaneously keeping the cold
ﬂuid at room temperature; otherwise, heat would eventually
be lost and the system would no longer perform at a desired
level. One way to maintain the temperature necessary to cause
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
538
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, APRIL 2013
SMA actuation is to continually add energy to the hot ﬂuid in
system. This can be accomplished by heating the ﬂuid within the
hot accumulator using an electrical heating coil or a chemical
reaction. Supplementary Joule heating may also be used in the
wet SMA actuators themselves.
III. FEASIBILITY STUDY
A feasibility study of the robotic pump system involves the
analysis of the net volumetric output in terms of output-to-
input ratio. Seven parameters largely inﬂuence this output per-
formance: SMA wire diameter, inner tube diameter, actuator
length, accumulator pressure, pumping chamber cross-sectional
area, mechanical advantage, and ﬂow duration. For example,
the diameter of the SMA wire affects the performance such that
larger diameter wires allow for higher force generation, but at
the cost of a lower rate of wire temperature change and, thus,
slower contraction. The inner tube diameter of the actuator also
affects the rate of temperature change of the SMA wire. How-
ever, increasing the tube diameter also increases the volumetric
input required into the system. Similarly, longer actuator lengths
require higher input volumes, but also provide larger strokes in
the pumping chambers, thus, increasing the volumetric output
of the robotic pump.
The operating accumulator pressure affects the performance
in many ways. A higher accumulator pressure will lead to an in-
crease in ﬂow rate through the actuator and decrease in the actu-
ation time, but will also impose a stronger opposing force to the
actuators and output pumping chambers. Increasing the cross-
sectional area of the pumping chambers only compounds this
problem, but also increases the potential output of the system.
This can be somewhat alleviated by way of using mechanical
advantage through a lever.
Flow duration affects the amount of contraction in the ac-
tuators. Large ﬂow durations may increase stroke, but at the
cost of volume input. However, too short of ﬂow durations will
not cause insufﬁcient contraction and limit stroke. Determining
limits of these parameters can be used to determine feasibility
of a given conﬁguration.
A. Net Positive Output
As discussed in [12], there are multiple ways to mathemat-
ically analyze the feasibility of the robotic pump. The ﬁrst re-
quirement of the robotic pump is that it must be able to pump
more than it requires for actuation. This can be expressed as
Qout ≥Qin
(1)
where Qout is the ﬂow rate output of the pump and Qin is the
ﬂow rate input required for sustainment. By analyzing the power
output of the robotic pump, Qout can be expressed as
Qout = NpσAwϵL
PCtf
(2)
and Qin can be expressed as
Qin = NAf L
tf
(3)
which leads to the constraint
Af
Aw
≤Npσϵ
NCP
(4)
where Aw is the wire area, Af is the ﬂuidic area, Np is the
number of contracting actuators, σ is the actuation strength of
the SMA wire, ϵ is the SMA wire strain, N is the number of
total number of actuators, L is the actuator length, P is the
accumulator pressure, and C is a constant representing the ratio
of contraction time tb to propagation time tf of the actuator
where C > 1. This condition must be satisﬁed in order for the
output-to-input ratio to be greater than unity, but is not sufﬁcient
to show that the entire conﬁguration of the robotic pump will
perform as required.
B. Sufﬁcient Heating of Actuators
The second requirement of the robotic pump is that the tem-
perature change of the ﬂuid as it propagates through the tube
satisﬁes ΔTf < ΔTf,max such that a phase transformation oc-
curs along the entire SMA wire. A linear approximation of the
temperature gradient of the ﬂuid along the length of the wire by
assuming the heat leaving the ﬂuid is equal to the heat entering
the wire can be expressed as
ΔTf
L
= ρwcp,wAwΔTwtf
ρf cp,f Af uf tb
(5)
where ρw, cp,w, and ΔTw are the density, speciﬁc heat, and
change in temperature of the SMA wire, respectively, and ρf ,
cp,f , and ΔTf ,max are the density, speciﬁc heat, and maximum
allowable temperature change of the ﬂuid, respectively. Substi-
tuting ΔTf < ΔTf ,max and assuming constant ﬂow velocity uf
along the entire wire leads to the following constraint:
Af
Aw
≥1
C
ρwcp,wΔTw
ρf cp,f ΔTf,max
(6)
where C is the same as in (4). Note that this constraint assumes
that the ﬂuid temperature is sufﬁciently hot prior to entering
the actuators. The max ﬂuid temperature depends on the boiling
point of the working ﬂuid (in our case water), which depends
on atmospheric pressure and, thus, elevation.
C. Adequate Flow Duration
By applying Newton’s Law of Cooling to the ﬂuid and SMA
wire, the wire temperature rate of change can be expressed as
˙Tw =
1
τw,f
(Tf −Tw)
(7)
τw,f = ρwcp,wDw(Dt −Dw)
kf Nu
(8)
where Dw is the SMA wire diameter, Dt is the inner tube
diameter, kf is the ﬂuid thermal conductivity, and Nu is the
Nusselt number at the wire. By assuming that the time constant
τ w,f is less than some fraction c of the contraction time where
τ w,f ≤ctb, the following constraint is found:
ctb ≥ρwcp,wDw(Dt −Dw)
4kf Nu
(9)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
PIERCE AND MASCARO: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED WET SHAPE MEMORY ALLOY ACTUATED ROBOTIC PUMP
539
where c < 1. As presented here, tb can also be viewed as the
heartbeat period. Note that as the system size increases with
increasing wire and actuator tube diameters, the heartbeat time
must also increase. This is an interesting parallel to nature since
larger animals also have larger heartbeat times.
D. Power Output
Another guide to designing the robotic pump can be derived
by solving for the time in (4) and substituting the beat time into
(9), yielding
NpL ≥1
c
ρwcp,w
πkf Nu
(Dt −Dw)
Dw
PQout
σϵ
(10)
which demonstrates that in order to increase the power output
of the pump, longer actuators or more contracting actuators are
required. The maximum theoretical output-to-input ratio of a
speciﬁc conﬁguration can be determined by assuming full con-
traction and no volumetric loss within the pumping chambers.
This maximum output-to-input ratio can be expressed as
Qout
Qin
= NpσϵAw
NCPAf
.
(11)
By substituting values into the constraints, it can be deter-
mined if a set of values, or conﬁguration, is feasible for an
output-to-input ratio greater than unity. Consider the list of typ-
ical parameter values is provided in Table I. By substituting
values into (4) and (6) and combining the constraints, a range
for Dt/Dw is determined to be 1.18 ≤Dt/Dw ≤7.37 for fea-
sibility. The conﬁguration in Table I gives Dt/Dw = 6.3 which
falls within this range. It should be noted that since there is an
initial temperature requirement prior to the ﬂuid entering the
actuators, electrical heating assistance can be used to bypass
constraint (6) at higher elevations by decreasing the contraction
time, thus, decreasing the value of C.
Finally, constraints (9) and (10) are satisﬁed upon substi-
tution of values suggesting this conﬁguration is feasible. By
substituting the values into (11), the maximum possible output-
to-input ratio for this conﬁguration is 1.38. This suggests that
this set of parameters could potentially be used to create a vi-
able SMA robotic pump. Limitations to this are heat loss to the
environment, underactuation of the actuators, and mechanical
losses in the pumping system. Again, electrical heating assis-
tance can be used to decrease the value of C in (11) to further
increase the maximum output. With the advantage of being able
to analyze feasibility of a system, the performance of various
conﬁgurations can be explored through dynamic modeling and
simulation.
E. Efﬁciency
In addition to knowing the feasibility of the pump, it is impor-
tant to know the maximum theoretical efﬁciency of this pump
in order to obtain a reference point of what to expect in terms of
power requirements for any physical implementations. This can
be calculated by evaluating how much work the SMA actuators
can perform per amount of energy required to cause actuation.
Assuming that no heat is lost to the environment at any point in
TABLE I
CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS FOR FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS
the system and that no mixing of hold and cold ﬂuids occurs,
the efﬁciency can represented as
ηP ≤wout
qin
(12)
where ηP is the efﬁciency of the pump, wout is the speciﬁc
work output of the SMA actuators, and qin is the speciﬁc energy
input to the actuators to cause phase transformation and, thus,
actuation. The speciﬁc work output of an SMA actuator can be
expressed as
wout = σϵ
ρw
(13)
and the speciﬁc energy required to cause actuation can be ex-
pressed as
qin = LT + cp,wΔTw
(14)
where LT is the latent heat of transformation of the SMA wire.
Substituting the values from Table I into (13) and (14) and eval-
uating (12), the maximum efﬁciency that can be achieved with
this pump system is 3.4%. This value agrees with the efﬁciency
projections of other researchers who propose ﬂuidic heating of
SMA actuators [17], and is much higher than the maximum the-
oretical efﬁciency of electrically heated SMA actuators since
much of the electrical energy goes into wasteful heating of the
surrounding ﬂuid. Note that as long as ﬂuidic heating is used
(where the hot ﬂuid is recycled), the use of supplemental Joule
heating should not degrade the efﬁciency since any electrical
energy that goes into heating the hot ﬂuid is no longer a waste.
In an actual implementation of the proposed pump, the practi-
cal efﬁciency will be less than 3.4% due to mixing of the hot and
cold ﬂuids, heat loss to the environment, and parasitic mechan-
ical losses within the system. Although the system is relatively
inefﬁcient compared to pumps driven by electric motors, one
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
540
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, APRIL 2013
advantage of the SMA pump is that it is capable of running
off of thermal energy. This is advantageous because the thermal
energy could be provided by a chemical energy source with an
energy density that is signiﬁcantly higher than that of batteries.
For example, the energy density of propane is 46 MJ/kg, whereas
the energy density of a lithium ion battery is only 460 kJ/kg.
Therefore, the 3.4% maximum efﬁciency is offset by a 100 to 1
advantage in energy storage.
IV. DYNAMIC MODELING AND SIMULATION
It is beneﬁcial to model the SMA pump dynamics in order
to predict the behavior of the system under various conditions.
This helps alleviate the number of experiments required in order
to ﬁnd the set of parameters that yields optimal output perfor-
mance. In order to model the entire pump system, dynamic
models of both the SMA actuators and the rest of the system are
required. A modiﬁed version of the dynamic model derived by
Ertel and Mascaro [11], [18] will be used for this application.
Modiﬁcations to the model include the use of a differential hys-
teresis model of the SMA actuators [19], temperature-dependent
ﬂuid properties, the ability to use complex timing schemes, and
the ability to apply Joule heating to the SMA actuators.
A. Dynamic Model
Ertel and Mascaro’s dynamic model was derived using energy
bond graphs and state-space methods. This allowed for combin-
ing individual wet SMA actuator models with the pumping sys-
tem model. Fig. 4 shows the complete bond graph used to derive
the state equations. In this ﬁgure, the actuators are divided into
three segments per actuator as opposed to 20 segments used in
the actual model. This bond graph couples two opposing actu-
ators each of which are attached to its own pumping chamber
through a lever with a given mechanical advantage. The effort
sources Se are martensite fractions modulated by SMA wire
temperature. These temperatures, determined by simulation of
hot and cold water passing through the wet SMA actuators, will
now be discussed.
By establishing the inlet temperature of the hot and cold ﬂuid
into the wet SMA actuators, the temperature rate of change of
the ﬂuid along the length of the actuator is given by
∂Tf
∂t = Tw −Tf
τf,w(x) + Tt −Tf
τf,t(x) −uf
∂Tf
∂x
(15)
where Tf is the ﬂuid temperature, Tw is the wire temperature,
Tt is the compliant tube temperature, uf is the ﬂuid velocity,
and x is the length along the actuator. The time constants in the
denominators are given by
τf,w(x) =
cp,f ρf (Df −Dw)

D2
f −D2
w

4Dwkf Nuw(x)
(16)
τf,t(x) =
cp,f ρf (Df −Dw)

D2
f −D2
w

4Dwkf Nut(x)
(17)
where cp,f is the speciﬁc heat of the ﬂuid, ρf is the ﬂuid den-
sity, Df is the inner diameter of the compliant tube, Dw is the
Fig. 4.
Bond graph of the entire SMA pumping system consisting of two wet
SMA actuators and two pumping chambers for hot and cold ﬂuid.
diameter of the wire, kf is the thermal conductivity of the ﬂuid,
Nuw(x) is the Nusselt number between the ﬂuid and the SMA
wire, and Nut(x) is the Nusselt number between the ﬂuid and
the inner surface of the compliant tube. The Nusselt numbers
are determined experimentally.
By obtaining the temperature of the ﬂuid along the actuator,
it is now possible to calculate the heat transfer from the ﬂuid to
the compliant tube and to the SMA wire. The temperature rate
of change of the compliant tube is given by
∂Tt
∂t = Tf −Tt
τt,f (x) + Ta −Tt
τt,a
(18)
where Ta is the ambient temperature surrounding the actuators.
The thermal time constants are
τt,f (x) =
cp,tρt (Df −Dw)

D2
t −D2
f

4Df kf Nut(x)
(19)
τt,a =
cp,f ρt

D2
t −D2
f

4kaNua
(20)
where cp,t is the speciﬁc heat of the tube, ρt is the density of
the tube, Dt is the outer diameter of the tube, ka is the thermal
conductivity of air, and Nua is the Nusselt number between the
tube and the ambient air. The rate of temperate change of the
SMA wire within the actuator is given by
∂Tw
∂t
= Tf −Tw
τw,f (x)
(21)
and the time constant is
τw,f (x) = cp,wρwDw (Df −Dw)
4kf Nuw (x)
.
(22)
The incorporation of electrical actuation will modify (21). By
adding electrical heating in addition to the ﬂuidic convection, the
overall output of the system is increased while also potentially
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
PIERCE AND MASCARO: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED WET SHAPE MEMORY ALLOY ACTUATED ROBOTIC PUMP
541
lowering the ﬂuid input at the same time. The rate of change in
temperature of an SMA actuator is given by
∂Tw
∂t
=
4i2R
πD2wρwcp,w
+ ∂Tw,f
∂t
(23)
where i is the electrical current, R is the electrical resistance of
the SMA wire per unit length of wire, and ∂Tw,f /∂t is given in
(21). This temperature change is used for modulating the SMA
wire martensite fraction and does not affect the bond graph or
the state equations. This effect was not previously considered in
Ertel and Mascaro’s original work [12].
Upon calculating the temperatures of the components within
the wet SMA actuators, the martensite fractions can then be
determined along the lengths of the SMA wires. Due to the
nonlinear behavior of martensite fraction and temperature, a
hysteresis model needs to be applied. As described in [19],
the hysteresis can be approximated with a cumulative normal
distribution curve. The martensite fraction Rm can be expressed
as
Rm(x) = 1
2

1 −erf
Tw(x) −¯T
σT
√
2

(24)
where ¯T is the average transformation temperature and σT is
the standard deviation of the transformation temperature. These
values differ depending on whether the transformation is from
martensite to austenite or vice versa and are used accordingly in
the model as given by the SMA manufacturer’s speciﬁcations.
Other methods have been used to model this same phase hys-
teresis [20], [21], but this method has proved to be reliable based
on Ertel and Mascaro’s application and results.
Before listing the dynamic states of the model, it is still nec-
essary to mention other modulating variables such as strain and
stress within the SMA wire of the actuators as they are inﬂu-
enced by the phase transformation. Noting that the actuators
are divided into segments, the strain of each of the SMA wire
segments is given by
ϵ =
4F/πD2
w
Ea + Rm (Em −Ea)
(25)
for ϵ ≤ϵy
m
ϵ = 4F/πD2
w −Rmϵy
m (Em −Et)
Ea + Rm (Et −Ea)
(26)
for ϵy
m < ϵ ≤ϵd
m, and
ϵ = 4F/πD2
w −Rm

ϵy
m (Em −Et) + ϵd
m (Et −Ed)
	
Ea + Rm (Ed −Ea)
(27)
for ϵ > ϵd
m where ε is the strain, ϵy
m is the yield strain of fully
twinned martensite, ϵd
m is the minimum strain of detwinned
martensite, F is the force in the actuator segment, and Ea, Em,
Et, and Ed are the moduli of elasticity for austenite, martensite,
twinned and detwinned martensite, respectively. By calculating
the strain, the stress σ can be expressed as
σ = Emϵ
(28)
for ϵ ≤ϵy
m
σ = Emϵy
m + Et(ϵ −ϵy
m)
(29)
for ϵy
m < ϵ ≤ϵd
m, and
σ = Emϵy
m + Et(ϵd
m −ϵy
m) + Ed(ϵ −ϵd
m)
(30)
for ϵ > ϵd
m and can be used to calculate the force in the actuators.
With all of the modulating variables now accounted for, the
states of the model will now be presented. The states include
actuator force, stress and strain, piston position and velocity,
pumping chamber pressure, and volume output. The force state
equation is
˙F = π
4 D2
w[Ea(1 −Rm)˙ϵ −Ea ˙Rmϵ + Rm ˙σ + ˙Rmσ]. (31)
The state equations for ˙ϵ and ˙σ are
˙ϵi = 1
R
⎡
⎣1
n
⎛
⎝
n

j=1
Fj + R
ΔLVm
⎞
⎠−Fi
⎤
⎦
(32)
˙σ =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
Em ˙ϵ,
ϵ ≤ϵy
m
Et ˙ϵ,
ϵy
m < ϵ ≤ϵd
m
Ed ˙ϵ,
ϵ > ϵd
m
(33)
where R is the linear damping coefﬁcient, n is the number of
actuator segments, Fj is the force in each segment force, ΔL is
the length of each segment, and Vm is the velocity of the end of
the actuators. The state equation for Vm is
˙Vm = 1
m
×
⎡
⎣Ap
M (Pc2 −Pc1) + 1
n
⎛
⎝
n

j=1
Fj,2 −
n

j=1
Fj,1 −2R
ΔLVm
⎞
⎠
⎤
⎦
(34)
where m is the number of time steps, Ap is the surface area of
the piston, M is the mechanical advantage through the lever, and
Pc1 and Pc2 are the pumping chamber pressures.
The state equations for the two pumping chambers are ex-
pressed as
˙Pc1 =
1
CV
Ap
M Vm −
1
Rout
(Pc1 −Paccum) −
1
Rin
Pc1

(35)
˙Pc2 =
1
CV

−Ap
M Vm −
1
Rout
(Pc2 −Paccum) −
1
Rin
Pc2

(36)
where CV is the volumetric capacitance within the piston cham-
bers, Paccum is the accumulator pressure, and Rin and Rout are
the ﬂuidic resistances in and out of the pumping chambers,
respectively. The values of these ﬂuidic resistances approach
inﬁnity against check valves.
B. Parameter Sensitivity
In order to effectively test for optimal performance by ex-
perimentation, it is necessary to ﬁnd a range for which optimal
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
542
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, APRIL 2013
Fig. 5.
Simulation results of output-to-input ratio demonstrating sensitivity to
actuator length and mechanical advantage.
performance is expected. This is possible by varying key pa-
rameters and modeling their inﬂuence on output performance.
Key parameters include actuator length, mechanical advantage
in the pumping lever, ﬂow duration through the actuators, ﬂuid
temperature, and the use of electrical actuation. The working
ﬂuid used for simulation was water.
While using longer actuators can be advantageous for larger
pump stroke, more ﬂow input is required and the heat loss to
the environment is increased. Due to this tradeoff, an optimal
actuator length is expected for peak performance. Similarly, a
high mechanical advantage can be beneﬁcial for overpowering
the accumulator pressure, but in a trade for decreased pump
stroke. Fig. 5 provides simulation results of output-to-input ratio
for varying actuator lengths and mechanical advantages.
Flow durations of 4 s with a stagnation periods of 2 s were
used for actuation timing over two complete cycles. The ﬁgure
suggests that the performance of the pump is expected to reach
its maximum potential with actuator lengths between 35 and
45 cm. Also, as the mechanical advantage decreases, the output
increases for nearly all actuator lengths. Similar trends hold
true for other ﬂow durations as well. A mechanical advantage of
0.84 will be used for the remaining simulations since modeling
suggests that this conﬁguration produces the highest volume
output. Simulations using lower mechanical advantages suggest
higher outputs, but also indicate that the tensile stress in the
actuators may exceed the pulling strength of the SMA.
The ﬂow duration of the ﬂuid passing through the actuators
is critical to the performance of the pump. The optimal timing
will depend greatly on the actuator length. Longer actuators will
require longer ﬂow durations in order to cause full phase trans-
formation along the entire wire within the actuator while smaller
actuators will require less. In order to fully understand the re-
lationship between actuator length, ﬂow duration, and output
performance, multiple simulations need to be completed.
Fig. 6 presents the results of 24 simulations of varying actua-
tor lengths and ﬂow durations. A hot water temperature of 88 ◦C
was used to match the local boiling point and compensate for the
heat loss from the accumulator to the actuators. An accumulator
pressure of 15 kPa was used to match that which will be used in
Fig. 6.
Simulation results of output-to-input ratio demonstrating the relation-
ship of ﬂow duration and actuator length.
the actual experiments. In the ﬁgure, it is shown that there exists
an optimal ﬂow duration for each actuator length. For example,
the optimal ﬂow duration for a 40-cm actuator is 4 s and yields a
performance ratio of 0.84 which also happens to be the highest
predicted performance of the pump using ﬂuid-only actuation.
As expected, longer ﬂow durations for smaller actuators result
in lower performance since input ﬂow is being wasted and not
inducing signiﬁcant additional actuation. Conversely, smaller
ﬂow durations are not causing enough actuation in longer ac-
tuators, thus also reducing the performance. It should be noted
that the required ﬂuid propagation time through the actuators is
generally less than 1.0 s for actuators less than 40 cm with an
accumulator pressure of 15 kPa.
The performance of the robotic pump will vary depending
on the temperature of the hot ﬂuid. Since water is the work-
ing ﬂuid, a simulation analysis of the performance of the pump
versus temperature will now be provided. The dependence of
the output-to-input ratio on hot water temperature is provided
in Fig. 7. Similar parameters were used to those mentioned
previously with 40-cm actuators and ﬂow duration of 4 s. As
is apparent, the performance varies signiﬁcantly based on the
hot water temperature. At sea level where the boiling point is
roughly 100 ◦C, the performance is expected to exceed a ratio
of 1.0. At higher elevations, this performance ratio may be un-
reachable without internal accumulator heating or the assistance
of electrical actuation.
Simulating the performance of the SMA robotic pump using
electrical actuation provides useful insight to the expected in-
crease in volume output-to-input ratio since less ﬂuid input is
required. While a performance increase is expected with elec-
trical actuation, there are multiple ways of implementing it.
Perhaps, one effective way to implement it is to run ﬂuid-only
actuation for some duration of time, and then provide the elec-
trical current to ﬁnish the SMA phase transformation. This can
be accomplished either during the ﬂuid ﬂow or after. By varying
the time at which electrical actuation begins, the optimal timing
can be determined.
Fig. 8 provides the simulation results for various ﬂow du-
rations and electrical timings. The lead time is deﬁned as the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
PIERCE AND MASCARO: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED WET SHAPE MEMORY ALLOY ACTUATED ROBOTIC PUMP
543
Fig. 7.
Simulation results of output-to-input ratio and the dependence on hot
water temperature within an effective range for water.
Fig. 8.
Simulation results of output-to-input ratio and various timing schemes
of ﬂuid-only ﬂow duration and electrical actuation lead timing.
amount of time prior to ﬂuidic ﬂow stopping that the electrical
actuation begins. A lead time of 0.0 s means that the electri-
cal actuation begins at the time the ﬂuid stops. An electrical
duration of 1 s was used for these simulations since prolonged
durations of passing current through the actuators can cause
permanent deformation. The electrical current used for the sim-
ulations was 4.5 A. The remaining parameters used reﬂect those
used to obtain the maximum ﬂuid-only performance discussed
previously.
The data presented in the ﬁgure suggest that ﬂow durations
between 1.5 and 2.0 s with little or no lead time yield the highest
overall performance. This seems intuitive since additional ﬂow
may be unnecessary with the electrical actuation. The data also
suggest that there is a point at which ﬂow duration is too small
since the ﬂuid propagation time through a 40-cm actuator is
roughly only 0.8 s. This is because the electrical actuation does
not provide enough heat to contract the SMA actuators with
colder ﬂuid surrounding them. The only way to compensate for
this effect would be to increase the amount of current being
passed through the SMA actuators. This would require more
capable power supplies to accommodate currents above 5 A.
TABLE II
OPTIMAL CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS
C. Optimal Conﬁguration Parameters
Based on simulation results, there are two sets of parameters
that will lead to optimal performance: one set for ﬂuid-only ac-
tuation and another set incorporating electrical actuation. The
optimal sets of parameters for these two conﬁgurations are pro-
vided in Table II. It should be noted that the hot water tempera-
tures listed in the table represent that which would be expected
during actual experimentation at an elevation of roughly 1400 m.
By improving the existing model, implementing electrical
actuation, and determining an optimal set of parameters with
which the pump will exceed an output-to-input ratio greater
than 1.0, it can now be expected that the prototype will meet the
necessary requirements to be able to supply ﬂuids to external
SMA subsystems. The next step is to validate the model by
providing actual experimental results and comparing them to
the simulation results presented in this chapter. This validation
is crucial to being able to continue manipulating the model to
ﬁnd other sets of parameters that could improve the performance
future iterations.
V. EXPERIMENTAL IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS
The previous section presented the output-to-input results of
multiple simulations where key parameters were varied to ﬁnd
an optimal set that would yield maximum performance. Two
types of sets were presented: one using ﬂuid-only actuation and
the other incorporating the assistance of electrical actuation.
A. Prototype
In order to accurately compare experimental results with sim-
ulated results, a prototype was built, which is a completely real-
ized physical embodiment of the dynamic model. The prototype
utilizes complex timing control, electrical actuation, ﬂuid sep-
aration and recycling, and continuous heat addition. Fig. 9 is
an actual photograph of the working prototype used for experi-
mental testing.
This prototype allows for parameter variation such as actuator
length and mechanical advantage. A heating element is located
inside the hot water accumulator in order to sustain performance
over extended periods of time. The ﬂow path is controlled by
four solenoid valves: two of them control the ﬂuid input to the
actuators through a control manifold and the other two separate
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
544
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, APRIL 2013
Fig. 9.
Design prototype capable of various wire lengths, mechanical advan-
tages, complex timing, ﬂuid separation, and allows for electrical actuation.
the hot and cold ﬂuid output from the actuators through a sepa-
ration manifold. Two power supplies are used to actuate the two
individual actuators.
B. Validating Simulation Results
In order to validate the simulation results, the optimal ﬂow
duration was found for each actuator length by using simulation
results in Fig. 5 as a baseline and then performing quick tests
to determine the optimal ﬂow duration by monitoring the out-
put. Upon obtaining the optimal timing for each actuator length,
formal ﬂuid-only actuation tests were conducted varying actu-
ator length and mechanical advantage to obtain results similar
to Fig. 4. As predicted, using a mechanical advantage of 0.84
yielded the best output results for all actuator lengths.
Fig. 10 compares the maximum output-to-input ratios
achieved both experimentally and by simulation. As is evi-
dent from the plot, the simulation results are within 5–10%
of the experimental results. It is also apparent that higher out-
puts were achieved with longer actuator lengths. The maximum
output-to-input ratio obtained with ﬂuid-only actuation under
the conditions provided in Table II was 0.88. By lowering the
accumulator pressure, higher performance was obtained, but this
required longer ﬂow durations that were unsuitable for practical
application toward actuating external wet SMA subsystems.
Since the performance of the ﬂuid-only experiments did not
exceed a volume output-to-input ratio greater than 1.0, electrical
actuation assistance is required. Electrical actuation tests were
then performed by varying ﬂow duration for 40-cm actuators
with a mechanical advantage of 0.84. All electrical actuation
tests were performed with the lead times in accordance with
Fig. 7 which suggests that the performance is best with no lead
except when the ﬂow duration is 1.5 s, at which point the optimal
lead time is 0.5 s.
Fig. 10.
Comparison of maximum experimental and simulation results of
output-to-input ratio for various actuator lengths using ﬂuid-only actuation.
Fig. 11.
Comparison of experimental and simulation results of output-to-input
ratio for optimal conﬁgurations using electrical actuation.
A comparison of the experimental and simulation output-to-
input performance results is provided in Fig. 11. It is evident
that the model is able to predict the experimental performance
with some accuracy for ﬂow durations longer than 1.0 s. The
model underestimates the performance when the ﬂow duration
is 1.0 s. The maximum output-to-input ratio reached experimen-
tally with using the aid of electrical actuation was 1.54 under the
conditions provided. This type of performance already meets the
requirements necessary to supply ﬂuid to additional wet SMA
subsystems while still being able to induce self-actuation.
C. Heat Addition
Without continuous heat addition to the system, the perfor-
mance of the pump degrades over time. Conversely, with heat
input, the performance is expected to be sustained and even ex-
ceed that of the nonheated system. This is because the boiling
point of the water will be higher due to the increased pressure
within the accumulators. An experimental comparison of the
output-to-input ratio over time using ﬂuid-only and electrical
actuation with 40-cm actuators with and without heat addition
is provided in Figs. 12 and 13, respectively. The results in the
ﬁgures conﬁrm that performance is sustained and that the per-
formance is signiﬁcantly higher with continuous heat addition
than without.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 10 ===
PIERCE AND MASCARO: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED WET SHAPE MEMORY ALLOY ACTUATED ROBOTIC PUMP
545
Fig. 12.
Experimental performance with ﬂuid-only actuation and 40-cm ac-
tuators, with and without heat input to the hot accumulator water.
Fig. 13.
Experimental performance with electrical actuation and 40-cm actu-
ators, with and without heat input to the hot accumulator water.
The SMA robotic pump’s maximum output-to-input ratio
reached 1.35 for ﬂuid-only actuation which is close to the pre-
dicted value of 1.38 from (11) as mentioned earlier. With elec-
trical heating assistance, an output-to-input ratio of 2.1 was
reached using 40-cm actuators and ﬂow duration of 1.5 s. With
this electrical conﬁguration, the pump is capable of pumping a
net output of 66 mL/min.
VI. CONCLUSION
A biologically inspired wet SMA robotic pump has been cre-
ated that can provide thermal energy via ﬂuidic convection to
external wet SMA subsystems. The robotic pump uses its own
thermoﬂuidic output to assist in actuation of its own internal
SMA actuators similar to a heart. It has been shown by sim-
ulation and experimentation that the SMA pump is capable of
providing sufﬁcient amounts of ﬂuid to actuate external SMA
systems on a macroscale. This is evident by the volumetric
output-to-input ratios of 1.4 using ﬂuid-only actuation and 2.1
with the assistance of Joule heating. The pump is capable of
pumping a net output of 66 mL/min, which is two orders of
magnitude larger than any other SMA pump. This output can
be increased, as suggested in (10), by increasing the number of
contracting actuators.
Future improvements planned for the robotic pump include
making the system more compact in volume, removing the need
for auxiliary electric inputs, and optimizing the practical efﬁ-
ciency of the pump. Making the system more compact while
maintaining a comparable volumetric output would require a
creative use of space while taking care not to impair the con-
traction of the SMA actuators. Methods to decrease the electrical
dependence include using ﬂuid-only heating and using mechan-
ically timed valves.
As mentioned previously, the maximum theoretical efﬁciency
that this system can achieve is 3.4%. The actual efﬁciency of this
prototype system is much less, but the goal at this stage was not
to optimize efﬁciency but rather to ﬁrst demonstrate that a net
positive volumetric output was practically achievable. In future
work, we will seek to characterize and optimize the practical
efﬁciency of the system by minimizing thermal and mechanical
losses. The efﬁciency of the optimized system will still be much
lower than a pump driven by electric motors. However, this
efﬁciency disadvantage is theoretically offset by a 100 to 1
advantage in chemical versus electric energy storage. The SMA
pump also has the unique advantage of silent operation, which
may be important for certain applications. In theory, the SMA
pump could operate continuously and silently with only a high-
energy-density chemical energy source to keep the hot ﬂuid hot.
REFERENCES
[1] I. W. Hunter and S. Lafontaine, “Comparison of muscle with artiﬁcial
actuators,” in Proc. IEEE Solid-State Sensor Actuator Workshop, Hilton
Head Island, SC, Jun. 1992, pp. 178–185.
[2] W. Haider, N. Munroe, C. Pulletikurthi, P. Gill, and S. Amruthaluri, “A
comparative biocompatibility analysis of ternary nitinol alloys,” J. Mater.
Eng. Perform., vol. 18, pp. 760–764, 2009.
[3] K. T. O’Toole, M. M. McGrath, and E. Coyle, “Analysis and evaluation of
the dynamic performance of SMA actuators for prosthetic hand design,”
in J. Mater. Eng. Perform., vol. 18, pp. 781–786, 2009.
[4] Y. Yam, K.-F. Lei, and P. Baranyi, “Control of a SMA actuated artiﬁcial
face via neuro-fuzzy techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Syst.,
Melbourne, Australia, 2001, pp. 1315–1318.
[5] B. J. Huang, J. H. Wang, J. H. Wu, and P. E. Yang, “A fast response heat
pump water heater using thermostat made from shape memory alloy,”
Appl. Thermal Eng., vol. 29, pp. 56–63, 2009.
[6] U. Icardi and L. Ferrero, “SMA actuated mechanism for an adaptive wing,”
J, Aerosp. Eng., vol. 24, pp. 140–143, 2011.
[7] Y. Tadesse, D. Hong, and S. Priya, “Twelve degree of freedom baby
humanoid head using shape memory alloy actuators,” J. Mech. Robot.,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2011.
[8] R. Kratz, S. Klug, M. Stelzer, and O. Von Stryk, “Biologically inspired
reﬂex based stabilization control of a humanoid robot with artiﬁcial SMA
muscles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Biomimetics, Kunming, China,
Dec. 2006, pp. 1089–1094.
[9] S. A. Mascaro and H. H. Asada, “Wet shape memory alloy actuators for
active vasculated robotic ﬂesh,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Taipei, Taiwan, Sep. 2003, pp. 282–287.
[10] L. Flemming and S. Mascaro, “Wet SMA actuator array with matrix
vasoconstriction device,” in Proc. ASME Int. Mech. Eng. Congr. Expo.,
Orlando, FL, 2005, pp. 1751–1758.
[11] J. D. Ertel, “Design and modeling of a shape memory alloy actuated
robotic heart,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Mech. Eng., Univ. Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT, 2007.
[12] J. Ertel and S. Mascaro, “Wet shape memory alloy actuated robotic heart,”
in Proc. ASME Dyn. Syst. Control Conf., Hollywood, CA, 2009, pp. 1033–
1040.
[13] W. L. Benard, H. Kahn, A. H. Heuer, and M. A. Huff, “Titanium-nickel
shape-memory alloy actuated micropump,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Solid-State
Sensors Actuators, Chicago, IL, 1997, pp. 361–364.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

=== PAGE 11 ===
546
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, VOL. 18, NO. 2, APRIL 2013
[14] G. Shuxiang, S. Xuesong, K. Ishii, and G. Jian, “SMA actuator-based
novel type of peristaltic micropump,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Autom.,
2008, pp. 1620–1625.
[15] M. D. Pierce and S. A. Mascaro, “Wet shape memory alloy actuated
robotic heart with thermoﬂuidic feedback,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., Sep. 2011, pp. 402–407.
[16] M. Pierce, “Design and optimization of a shape memory alloy actuated
pump with thermoﬂuidic feedback,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Mech. Eng., Univ.
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 2011.
[17] O. K. Rediniotis, D. C. Lagoudas-Dimitris, H. Y. Jun, and R. D. Allen,
“Fuel-powered compact SMA actuator,” in Proc. SPIE Conf. Smart Struct.
Mater., 2002, vol. 4698, pp. 441–453.
[18] J. D. Ertel and S. A. Mascaro, “Dynamic thermomechanical modeling of
a wet shape memory alloy actuator,” Trans. ASME, J. Dyn. Syst., Meas.
Control, vol. 132, pp. 1–9, 2010.
[19] S. M. Dutta and F. H. Ghorbel, “Differential hysteresis modeling of a
shape memory alloy wire actuator,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 189–197, Apr. 2005.
[20] M. Kadkhodaei, R. K. N. D. Rajapakse, M. Mahzoon, and M. Salimi,
“Modeling of the cyclic thermomechanical response of SMA wires at
different strain rates,”
Smart Mater. Struct., vol. 16, pp. 2091–2101,
2007.
[21] J. Abadie, N. Chaillet, and C. Lexcellent, “Modeling of a new SMA
micro-actuator for active endoscopy applications,” Mechatronics, vol. 19,
pp. 437–442, 2009.
Matthew D. Pierce received the B.S. and M.S. de-
grees in mechanical engineering from the Univer-
sity of Utah, Salt Lake City, in 2009 and 2011,
respectively.
From 2009 to 2011, he was an Assistant Engineer
in the Navigation Systems Division, Northrop Grum-
man. Since 2011, he has been a mechanical engineer
at L-3 Communications, New York, NY.
Stephen A. Mascaro (S’97–M’03) received the B.A.
degree in physics from Houghton College, Houghton,
NY, in 1995, the B.S. degree in mechanical engi-
neering from Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, in
1995, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in mechani-
cal engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, in 1997 and 2002,
respectively.
From 2002 to 2003, he was a Postdoctoral Asso-
ciate in the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
MIT. From 2003 to 2004, he was an Assistant Profes-
sor of mechanical engineering at North Dakota State University, Fargo. Since
2005, he has been an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City. His current research interests
include robotics and control, system dynamics, human–machine interaction,
haptics, and bioinspired actuation.
Dr. Mascaro received the Best Paper Award at the 1999 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation for his original work on ﬁngernail
sensors, which was published in the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS AND
AUTOMATION in 2001 and 2004. He is a member of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Viet Nam National University Ho Chi Minh City. Downloaded on September 22,2026 at 03:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

